August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
1
Original Research
published: 10 August 2017
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00948
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Hao Shen, 
Perelman School of Medicine,  
United States
Reviewed by: 
Mariela Segura,  
Université de Montréal, Canada  
Yan Wang,  
University of Pennsylvania, 
United States
*Correspondence:
Haruki Kitazawa 
haruki.kitazawa.c7@tohoku.ac.jp; 
Julio Villena 
jcvillena@cerela.org.ar
†These authors have contributed 
equally to this work.
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Microbial Immunology, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 14 March 2017
Accepted: 25 July 2017
Published: 10 August 2017
Citation: 
Clua P, Kanmani P, Zelaya H, Tada A, 
Kober AKMH, Salva S, Alvarez S, 
Kitazawa H and Villena J (2017) 
Peptidoglycan from Immunobiotic 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus Improves 
Resistance of Infant Mice to 
Respiratory Syncytial Viral Infection 
and Secondary Pneumococcal 
Pneumonia. 
Front. Immunol. 8:948. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00948
Peptidoglycan from immunobiotic 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus improves 
resistance of infant Mice to 
respiratory syncytial Viral infection 
and secondary Pneumococcal 
Pneumonia
Patricia Clua1,2†, Paulraj Kanmani3,4†, Hortensia Zelaya1,5, Asuka Tada3,  
A. K. M. Humayun Kober3,4, Susana Salva1,2, Susana Alvarez1,2,5, Haruki Kitazawa3,4*  
and Julio Villena1,2,3*
1 Immunobiotics Research Group, Tucuman, Argentina, 2 Laboratory of Immunobiotechnology, Reference Centre for 
Lactobacilli (CERELA-CONICET), Tucuman, Argentina, 3 Food and Feed Immunology Group, Laboratory of Animal Products 
Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 4 Livestock Immunology Unit, 
International Education and Research Center for Food and Agricultural Immunology (CFAI), Graduate School of Agricultural 
Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 5 Institute of Applied Biochemistry, National University of Tucumán, Tucuman, Argentina
Several research works have demonstrated that beneficial microbes with the capacity 
to modulate the mucosal immune system (immunobiotics) are an interesting alternative to improve the outcome of bacterial and viral respiratory infections. Among the 
immunobiotic strains with the capacity to beneficially modulate respiratory immunity, 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 has outstanding properties. Although we have 
significantly advanced in demonstrating the capacity of L. rhamnosus CRL1505 to 
improve resistance against respiratory infections as well as in the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms involved in its beneficial activities, the potential protective ability of this 
strain or its immunomodulatory cellular fractions in the context of a secondary bacterial 
pneumonia has not been addressed before. In this work, we demonstrated that the 
nasal priming with non-viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 or its purified peptidoglycan 
differentially modulated the respiratory innate antiviral immune response triggered by tolllike receptor 3 activation in infant mice, improving the resistance to primary respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV) infection, and secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. In association 
with the protection against RSV-pneumococcal superinfection, we found that peptidoglycan from L. rhamnosus CRL1505 significantly improved lung CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, and 
CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T cells as well as CD11c+SiglecF+IFN-β+ alveolar macrophages with 
the consequent increases of IFN-γ, IL-10, and IFN-β in the respiratory tract. Our results 
also showed that the increase of these three cytokines is necessary to achieve protection 
against respiratory superinfection since each of them are involved in different aspect of 
the secondary pneumococcal pneumonia that have to be controlled in order to reduce 
the severity of the infectious disease: lung pneumococcal colonization, bacteremia, and 
inflammatory-mediated lung tissue injury.
Keywords: immunobiotics, peptidoglycan, toll-like receptor 3, viral immunity, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
respiratory syncytial virus
2
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
INTRODUCTION
Respiratory viral attack often result in mild to moderate infection; however, life-threatening disease can occur in high-risk 
populations such as infants, elderly, and immunocompromised hosts. Moreover, secondary bacterial pneumonia is an 
important complication responsible for high morbidity and 
mortality during epidemic and pandemic viral respiratory 
infections in infants and children (1–3). It was demonstrated 
that secondary bacterial respiratory infections are caused 
primarily by Streptococcus pneumoniae. The majority of the 
clinical observations and experiments in animal models have 
focused in post-influenza pneumococcal pneumonia (4). In 
fact, numerous studies have investigated how primary influenza 
virus (IFV) infection enhances the susceptibility to secondary 
pneumococcal disease, by increasing bacterial attachment and 
colonization, disrupting epithelial barriers, and altering the 
innate immune response in the respiratory tract (3). Although 
IFV and S. pneumoniae interaction has been extensively studied 
because of its great impact in the severity of respiratory infections, other viruses like the Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) 
have been associated to an increased susceptibility to secondary 
pneumococcal pneumonia.
Clinical and epidemiologic data suggest that RSV is linked to 
increases in the frequency (5) and severity (6) of pneumococcal 
disease. It was also demonstrated that mice infected with RSV 
before pneumococcal challenge as well as mice infected with both 
respiratory pathogens simultaneously showed enhanced lung 
alterations and elevated levels of bacteremia (7, 8). Mechanisms 
underlying pneumococcal superinfection include RSV-induced 
local destruction of the epithelium and respiratory ciliary 
dyskinesia that impairs mucociliary clearance in the airways 
(8). Elevated pneumococcal adherence to the respiratory tract 
epithelium is also considered one of the mechanisms facilitating 
S. pneumoniae infection. It was reported that intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), carcinoembryonic adhesion molecule 
1 (CEACAM1), and platelet activating factor receptor (PAF) 
are upregulated by RSV infection in respiratory epithelial cells, 
which are molecules used by pneumococci for colonization (9). 
Moreover, in vitro experiments with HEp-2 cells (human nasopharyngeal), A549 cells (pneumocyte type II), or human airway 
epithelial cell primary cultures showed that RSV virions enhance 
pneumococcal adherence through the expression of the viral G 
protein in epithelial surfaces that serve as an adhesion molecule 
for pneumococci (7, 8, 10). Surprisingly, transcriptomic analysis 
performed by Smith et al. (8) showed that the direct interaction 
between RSV and S. pneumoniae alters bacterial gene expression. 
The work demonstrated that the pneumococcal penicillinbinding protein 1a binds RSV G protein and that this interaction 
alters S. pneumoniae transcriptome increasing the expression of 
the virulence factors pneumolysin and neuraminidase A/B. These 
results indicate that complex interactions exist between RSV,  
S. pneumoniae, and host, which must be fully characterized in 
order to reduce the severity and mortality of respiratory superinfections caused by these pathogens.
During the last years, several research works have demonstrated that beneficial microbes with the capacity to modulate 
the mucosal immune system (immunobiotics) are a potential 
alternative to improve the outcome of bacterial (11) and viral 
(12) respiratory infections. Among the immunobiotic strains 
with the capacity of beneficially modulate respiratory immunity, 
our research group has demonstrated that Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 has outstanding properties. Nasal priming with  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 is able to significantly increase the resistance against the respiratory pathogens S. pneumoniae, IFV, or RSV 
(13–15). We have also reported that immunobiotic L. rhamnosus 
CRL1505 is able to differentially regulate the levels and kinetics of 
respiratory inflammatory cells and cytokines in mice after activation of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) by the nasal administration of 
poly(I:C), or after the challenge with RSV or IFV (13, 14). This 
beneficial regulation of virus-triggered inflammatory response 
in the respiratory tract by the CRL1505 strain correlated with a 
significant reduction in lung damage and improved survival of 
infected mice (13, 14). Of interest, we have demonstrated that 
viability of the immunobiotic strain is not necessary to achieve  
the protective effect. In fact, protection against RSV or S. pneumoniae infections can be improved by nasal administration of 
non-viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (13) or its peptidoglycan 
(15), respectively. Although we have significantly advanced in 
demonstrating the capacity of L. rhamnosus CRL1505 to improve 
resistance against respiratory infections as well as in the cellular 
and molecular mechanisms involved in its beneficial activities 
(12), the potential protective ability of this strain or its immunomodulatory cellular fractions in the context of a secondary 
bacterial pneumonia has not been addressed before.
We hypothesized that the effect of immunobiotics or their 
immunomodulatory cellular fractions in the respiratory antiviral 
innate immune response could beneficially influence the resistance to secondary bacterial infections. Therefore, in the present 
study, we investigated how the exposure of infant mice to the 
nasal priming with non-viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 or its peptidoglycan influences the respiratory innate immune response 
triggered by TLR3 activation, the susceptibility to primary RSV 
infection, and the resistance to secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. We demonstrated that peptidoglycan from immunobiotic 
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 improves respiratory antiviral innate 
immune response, reduces bacterial transmigration across the 
lung, and limits pulmonary inflammatory damage caused by  
S. pneumoniae after the challenge with poly(I:C) or the infection 
with RSV.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Microorganisms and Peptidoglycan
Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 was obtained from the 
CERELA culture collection (Chacabuco 145, San Miguel de 
Tucumán, Argentina). The culture was kept freeze-dried. For 
experiments the culture was rehydrated using a medium containing 15 g of peptone, 10 g tryptone, and 5 g of meat extract 
in 1 l of distilled water, pH 7. Then, lactobacilli were cultured 
for 12 h at 37°C (final log phase) in Man–Rogosa–Sharpe broth 
(MRS, Oxoid). The bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 
3,000 × g for 10 min, washed three times with sterile 0.01 mol/l 
Figure 1 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on lung tissue damage induced by the nasal 
administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days 
and then challenged with three once-daily doses of poly(I:C) (A). Non-treated infant mice challenged with poly(I:C) were used as controls. 2 days after the last 
poly(I:C) administration lung wet:dry weight ratio (B), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and, albumin and protein concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) 
(C) were determined. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.05.
3
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.2), and resuspended in sterile 
PBS. Non-viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) was obtained 
as described previously (13). Bacteria were killed by tyndallization in a water bath at 80°C for 30 min, and the lack of bacterial 
growth was confirmed using MRS agar plates. Peptidoglycan 
from L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (PG1505) was obtained as described 
previously (15). Briefly, the bacterium was grown in MRS broth 
for 18 h at 37°C, washed three times with sterile PBS, and lyophilized. Lactobacilli were resuspended in sterile water (0.1 g/ml)  
and lysed by sonication in an Ultrasonic Homogenizer (Cole 
Parmer) with cycles of 2.5 min and amplitude of 70%. The cell wall 
obtained was delipidated by successive refluxing with methanol, 
methanol–chloroform (1:1), and chloroform. The delipidated 
preparation was resuspended in Tris–HCl buffer 50 µM (pH 7.5) 
and treated with bovine pancreatic DNAse I (Sigma) (50 µg/ml) 
and ribonuclease A (Sigma) (100 µg/ml) at 37°C, 4 h. Finally, cell 
wall was treated with 50% hydrogen chloride at 4°C for 20 h. The 
PG1505 obtained was washed with sterile water, adjusted to pH 
7.2, and lyophilized until use.
Animals and Feeding Procedures
Infant (3-week-old) BALB/c mice were obtained from the closed 
colony kept at CERELA (San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina). 
They were housed in plastic cages at room temperature. Mice 
were housed individually during the experiments and the assays 
for each parameter studied were performed in 5–6 mice per 
group for each time point. HK1505 was nasally administered to 
infant mice for 2 consecutive days at a dose of 108 cells/mouse/
day in 50 µl of PBS (13). PG1505 was nasally administered to 
infant mice for 2 consecutive days at a dose of 8 µg/ml, in 50 µl of 
PBS (15). Anesthesia was not necessary for HK1505 or PG1505 
administration since mice did not show any sing of discomfort. 
The treated groups and the untreated control group were fed a 
conventional balanced diet ad libitum. This study was carried out 
in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for 
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Guidelines for 
Animal Experimentation of CERELA and all efforts were made 
to minimize suffering.
Intranasal Administration of Poly(I:C)
Administration of the viral pathogen molecular pattern poly(I:C) 
was performed on day 3, after the 2-day treatments with HK1505 
or PG1505 as shown in Figure 1A. Mice were lightly anesthetized and 100 µl of PBS, containing 250 µg poly(I:C) (equivalent 
to 10 mg/kg body weight), was administered dropwise, via the 
nares (13, 16, 17). Control animals received 100 µl of PBS. Mice 
received three doses of poly(I:C) or PBS with 24 h rest period 
between each administration.
RSV Infection
Human RSV strain A2 was grown in Vero cells as described 
previously (13, 16). Briefly, Vero cells were infected with RSV at 
4
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
a multiplicity of infection of 1 in 5 ml of Dulbecco’s modified 
Eagle’s medium (DMEM). Cells were infected for 3 h at 37°C, 
5% CO2. After infection, 7 ml of DMEM with 10% fetal bovine 
serum (Sigma, Tokyo, Japan), 0.1% penicillin–streptomycin (Pen/
Strep) (Sigma, Tokyo, Japan), and 0.001% ciprofloxacin (Bayer) 
was added to the flask, and cells were incubated until extensive 
syncytium formation was detected. Then, Vero cells were scraped 
and sonicated three times, 5 s per time, at 25 W on ice. Cell debris 
was removed by centrifugation at 700 g for 10 min at 4°C. Virus 
supernatant was sucrose density gradient purified and stored in 
30% sucrose at −80°C. For in vivo infection, mice were lightly 
anesthetized with isoflurane and intranasally challenged with 
3.1 × 106 PFU of RSV (13, 16). Viral challenge was performed on 
day 3, after the 2-day treatments with HK1505 or PG1505. Lung 
RSV titers and tissue damage were evaluated during 5 days after 
viral infection.
For the evaluation of viral infection, the RSV immuno­plaque 
assay was performed as described previously (13, 16). In brief, lung 
tissue was removed from infant mice and stored in 30% sucrose 
for plaque assay. Lungs were homogenized using a pellet pestle 
and centrifuged at 2,600 × g for 10 min at 4°C to clarify supernatant. Serial dilutions of lung tissue-clarified supernatants were 
added into fresh Vero cells monolayers, and incubated at 37°C, 
5% CO2 for 3 h. All samples were run in triplicate. After incubation and removal of supernatant, 1 ml of fresh DMEM medium 
containing 10% FBS, 0.1% Pen/Strep, and 0.001% ciprofloxacin 
was added to monolayers. When extensive syncytia developed, 
monolayers were fixed with 1 ml of ice-cold acetone:methanol 
(60:40). Then, well were treated with primary RSV anti-F (clones 
131-2A; Chemicon) and anti-G (Mouse monoclonal [8C5 (9B6)] 
to RSV glycoprotein, Abcam) antibodies for 2  h, followed by 
secondary horseradish peroxidase anti-mouse immunoglobulin 
antibody (Anti-mouse IgG, HRP-linked Antibody #7076, Cell 
signaling Technology) for 1 h. Plates washed twice with PBS containing 0.5% Tween 20 (Sigma) after each antibody incubation 
step. Individual plaques were developed using a DAB substrate kit 
(ab64238, Abcam) following manufacture’s specifications. Results 
were expressed as log10 PFU/g of lung.
S. pneumoniae Secondary Infection
Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 6B (ANLIS, Argentina) 
was obtained from the respiratory tract of a patient from the 
Children’s Hospital, Tucuman, Argentina. Pneumococci were 
grown on blood agar for 18 h. Colonies were suspended in Todd 
Hewitt broth (Oxoid), incubated overnight at 37°C, harvested, 
and washed with sterile PBS. Cell density was adjusted to 
4 × 107 CFU/ml.
Challenge with pneumococci was performed 1, 3, and 5 days 
after the last administration of poly(I:C) (data not shown), and 
a higher susceptibility to bacterial infection was found when 
the challenge was performed 5  days after TLR3 activation. In 
addition, several published articles performed bacterial infection 5–7 days after respiratory viral challenge considering that 
viral load and cytokine environment are different in the earlier 
and later stages of viral infection (4, 18). Then, challenge with 
pneumococci was also performed 5 days after the infection with 
RSV. HK1505- and PG1505-treated as well as control infant mice 
were challenged intranasally with the pathogen by dripping 25 µl 
of inoculums containing 103, 104, 106, or 107 CFU (log phase) in 
PBS into each nostril.
Treated and control mice were sacrificed 2 days after S. pneumoniae infection. Lungs were excised, weighed, and homogenized 
in sterile peptone water. Homogenates were diluted appropriately, 
plated in duplicate on blood agar and incubated for 18 h at 37°C. 
S. pneumoniae was identified by standard techniques and the 
results were expressed as log of CFU/g of lung. Bacteremia was 
monitored by blood samples obtained by cardiac puncture which 
were plated on blood agar. Results were reported as negative or 
positive hemocultures.
Blocking Experiments
In order to evaluate the role of IFN-β, IFN-γ, and IL-10 in the 
immunoprotective effect of HK1505 and PG1505, anti-IFN-β, 
anti-IFN-γ, and anti-IL-10 receptor (IL-10R) blocking antibodies 
were used (16). Different groups of mice were nasally primed with 
HK1505 or PG1505 for 2 days and then challenged with poly(I:C) 
for 3 days as described above. On days 2 and 4 after poly(I:C) 
challenge, mice were nasally treated with 50  μg of purified 
IFN-β (LEAF™ Purified anti-mouse IFN-β antibody, #519202 
BioLegend), purified anti-IFN-γ (LEAF™ Purified anti-mouse 
IFN-γ antibody, #505706 BioLegend), or anti-IL-10R (LEAF™ 
Purified anti-mouse IL-10R antibody, #112708, BioLegend, 
Tokyo, Japan) antibodies or 250  μg isotype control antibodies 
(LEAF™ Purified Rat IgG1, Isotype Ctrl, BioLegend). Twelve 
hours later mice were challenged with S. pneumoniae (Figure S1 
in Supplementary Material). The efficiency of blocking antibodies 
was determined by evaluating serum and respiratory concentration of IFN-β, IFN-γ, or IL-10 12 h after the last administration.
Lung Injury Parameters
Bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) samples were obtained as described 
previously (13, 16). Briefly, the trachea was exposed and intubated 
with a catheter, and two sequential lavages were performed in each 
mouse by injecting sterile PBS. The recovered fluid was centrifuged 
for 10 min at 900 × g; and frozen at −70°C for subsequent analyses.
Protein and albumin content, a measure to quantitate 
increased permeability of the bronchoalveolar–capillarity barrier, 
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, an indicator of general 
cytotoxicity, were determined in the acellular BAL fluid. Protein 
content was measured by the bicinchoninic (BCA) protein assay 
(Pierce Biotechnology Inc., Rockford, IL, USA). Albumin content 
was determined colorimetrically based on albumin binding to 
bromcresol green using an albumin diagnostic kit (Wiener Lab, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina). LDH activity, expressed as units per 
liter of BAL fluid, was determined by measuring the formation 
of the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide using 
the Wiener reagents and procedures (Wiener Lab). Lung wet:dry 
weight ratio was measured as previously described (13, 17). 
Wet:dry weight ratio was calculated as an index of intrapulmonary fluid accumulation, without correction for blood content.
Histopathological examination was also performed in 
order to further evaluate tissue damage. Lungs were aseptically 
removed, fixed in 4% formalin, and embedded in histowax (Leica 
Microsystems). Histopathological assessment was performed on 
5
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
5-µm tissue sections stained with hematoxylin–eosin. At least 
four tissue sections from various areas of the lung of each mouse 
in all experimental groups were examined.
Cytokine Concentrations in Serum and 
BAL
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α (Mouse TNF-alpha Quantikine 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) Kit, sensitivity: 
7.2  pg/ml), interferon (IFN)-α (Mouse IFN-alpha ELISA Kit, 
sensitivity: 12.5  pg/ml), IFN-β (Mouse IFN-beta ELISA Kit, 
sensitivity: 15.5 pg/ml), IFN-γ (Mouse IFN-gamma Quantikine 
ELISA Kit, sensitivity: 2 pg/ml), interleukin (IL)-6 (Mouse IL-6 
Quantikine ELISA Kit, sensitivity: 1.8  pg/ml), IL-8 (Mouse 
IL-8 Quantikine ELISA Kit, sensitivity: 2 pg/ml), IL-10 (Mouse  
IL-10 Quantikine ELISA Kit, sensitivity: 5.2 pg/ml), and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 (Mouse/Rat CCL2/JE/MCP-1 
Quantikine ELISA Kit, sensitivity: 2  pg/ml) concentrations in 
serum and BAL were measured with commercially available 
ELISA technique kits following the manufacturer’s recommendations (R&D Systems, MN, USA).
Lung Cells Preparation and Flow 
Cytometry Studies
Single lung cells from mice were prepared as previously des­cribed 
(13, 17). Lungs were removed, finely minced, and incubated for 
90 min with 300 U of collagenase (Yakult Honsha Co., Tokyo, 
Japan) in 15 ml of RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma, Tokyo, Japan). To 
dissociate the tissue into single cells, collagenase-treated minced 
lungs were gently tapped into a plastic dish. After removal of 
debris, erythrocytes were depleted by hypotonic lysis. The cells 
were washed with RPMI medium supplemented with 100 U/ml 
of penicillin and 100 mg/ml of streptomycin and then resuspended in a medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated 
fetal calf serum. Cells were counted using Trypan Blue exclusion 
and then resuspended at an appropriate concentration of 5 × 106 
cells/ml.
Lung cell suspensions were pre-incubated with anti-mouse 
CD32/CD16 monoclonal antibody (Fc block) for 15 min at 4°C. 
Cells were incubated in the antibody mixes for 30 min at 4°C 
and washed with FACS buffer. Then, cells were stained with 
fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies against CD3, CD4, CD8, 
CD11c, CD11b, CD103, MHC-II, IFN-γ, IL-10, sialic acid- 
binding immunoglobulin-like lectin F (SiglecF) (BD Bioscience), 
IFN-β, and CD45 (eBioscience). Cells were then acquired on a 
BD FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data 
were analyzed with FlowJo software (TreeStar). The total number of cells in each population was determined by multiplying 
the percentages of subsets within a series of marker negative 
or positive gates by the total cell number determined for each 
tissue (13, 17).
Statistical Analysis
Experiments were performed in triplicate and results were 
expressed as mean ± SD. After verification of the normal distribution of data, 2-way ANOVA was used. Tukey’s test (for pairwise 
comparisons of the means) was used to test for differences 
between the groups. Differences were considered significant at 
P < 0.05.
RESULTS
Nasally Administered Peptidoglycan from 
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 Reduces Poly(I:C)Induced Lung Injuries
We have previously demonstrated that nasal administration 
of non-viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) reduced lung 
injuries triggered by TLR3 activation (13). Here, we aimed to 
evaluate the effect of the nasal priming with the peptidoglycan 
from L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (PG1505) on the immune response 
triggered by the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern 
poly(I:C) and compare it with the effect induced by HK1505. 
For this purpose, infant mice were treated with PG1505 and 
then challenged with poly(I:C) as shown in the experimental 
protocol of Figure 1A. HK1505 treatment was used as a positive 
control. Lung injury was studied on day 2 post-challenge as we 
described previously (13, 17). An altered lung wet:dry weight 
ratio (Figure 1B), as well as increased levels of LDH activity and 
protein and albumin concentrations (Figure 1C) were found in 
BAL samples of poly(I:C)-treated infant mice, indicating local 
cellular damage and impairment of the alveolar-capillary barrier. Nasally administered HK1505 or PG1505 did not induce 
significant changes in the BAL biochemical parameters evaluated 
before poly(I:C) administration (data not shown). Both, HK1505 
or PG1505 significantly diminished wet:dry weight ratio and the 
three biochemical parameters evaluated in BAL after poly(I:C) 
challenge (Figure 1). HK1505 and PG1505 were equally effective 
to reduce the lung alterations induced by TLR3 activation.
Nasally Administered Peptidoglycan from 
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 Beneficially 
Modulates Immune Response Triggered 
by Poly(I:C) Challenge
In order to evaluate the effect of HK1505 and PG1505 in the 
respiratory immune system of infant mice, we first determined 
the levels of different cytokines in BAL before poly(I:C) administration (Figure  2). Both, HL1505 and PG1505 treatments 
significantly increased the levels of BAL IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, 
IL-10, and IL-6. BAL concentrations of IFN-α in HK1505 mice 
and IL-6 in PG1505 mice were higher than the other experimental groups. No significant differences were found when the levels 
of TNF-α, MCP-1, and IL-8 of control mice were compared with 
mice receiving HK1505 or PG1505 (Figure 2). The treatments 
were also able to increase serum IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, IL-10, 
and IL-6, being both HK1505 and PG1505 equally effective to 
achieve this effect (Figure S2 in Supplementary Material). No 
differences were found in the levels of serum TNF-α, MCP-1, 
or IL-8 when comparing HK1505 and PG1505 with controls. 
We also evaluated the changes induced by nasally administered 
HK1505 and PG1505 in lung immune cells using flow cytometry. 
Nasal priming with HK1505 and PG1505 enhanced the number 
of CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+ and CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T  cells in lungs 
Figure 2 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on respiratory cytokines before and after the nasal 
administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days 
and then challenged with three once-daily doses of poly(I:C). Non-treated infant mice challenged with poly(I:C) were used as controls. Before and 2 days after 
poly(I:C) administration, the levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interferon (IFN)-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-10, and monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 (MCP-1) were determined in bronchoalveolar lavages. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between 
treated and control groups, *P < 0.05.
6
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
while no effect was observed for CD3+CD8+IFN-γ+ T cells when 
compared to controls (Figure 3). In addition, three population 
of antigen presenting cells were studied in lungs: myeloid DCs 
(MHC-II+CD11c+CD11blowCD103+ and MHC-II+CD11c+CD
11bhighCD103− cells) and alveolar macrophages (CD45+MHCII−CD11c+SiglecF+). 
HK1505 
and 
PG1505 
significantly 
increased the number of both lung CD11c+CD11blowCD103+ and 
CD11c+CD11bhighCD103− DCs, while no quantitative changes 
were detected in CD45+CD11c−SiglecF+ macrophages (Figure 3) 
or CD45+Gr1+neutrophils (data not shown).
The respiratory immune response triggered by poly(I:C) in 
infant mice and the effect of the nasal priming with HK1505 
and PG1505 in that response were next studied. As we described 
previously (13, 17), the nasal administration of poly(I:C) 
significantly increased respiratory levels of type I IFNs (IFN-α, 
IFN-β), IFN-γ, and pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
(TNF-α, IL-6, MCP-1, IL-8) in BAL of infant mice (Figure 2). 
Both HK1505 and PG1505 treatments significantly increased 
the levels of BAL IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, and TNF-α while they 
diminished the concentration of IL-6 and MCP-1 (Figure 2). In 
addition, IL-8 was not modified in HK1505 or PG1505 groups 
when compared to control mice (Figure 2). Poly(I:C) stimulation also induced an increase in the respiratory levels of IL-10 
that were significantly higher in HK1505- or PG1505-treated 
mice when compared to controls (Figure 2). Lung immune cells 
populations were also evaluated in poly(I:C)-challenged mice 
(Figure  3). Poly(I:C) administration increased the numbers 
of CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, CD3+CD4+IL-10+, CD3+CD8+IFN-γ+ 
T  cells, and myeloid DCs (MHC-II+CD11c+CD11blowCD103+ 
and MHC-II+CD11c+CD11bhighCD103− cells) in lungs as we 
described previously (13, 17). In addition, we also observed an 
increase in alveolar macrophages (CD45+CD11c+SiglecF+) and 
neutrophils (CD45+Gr1+) after the challenge with poly(I:C) when 
compared to basal levels (Figure 3). Nasal priming with HK1505 
or PG1505 increased the numbers of lung CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, 
and CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T cells as well as MHC-II+CD11c+CD103+ 
and MHC-II+CD11c+CD11bhigh DCs (Figure 3). No significant 
modification of the numbers of lung CD3+CD8+IFN-γ+ T cells or 
CD45+CD11c+SiglecF+ macrophages (Figure 3) were observed 
after HK1505 or PG1505 treatments when compared to controls. 
Significantly reduced numbers of neutrophils in BAL and lung 
were found in HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice when compared 
to controls (Figure 3).
Nasally Administered Peptidoglycan from 
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 Improves 
Resistance against RSV Infection
We next evaluated whether the changes induced by PG1505 in 
the respiratory immune system affected the outcome of RSV 
infection in infant mice as described previously for HK1505 (13). 
Therefore, infant mice were treated with HK1505 or PG1505 by 
the nasal route and then challenged with 106 PFU of RSV (13, 16). 
Evaluation of viral loads of infected mice showed that RSV was 
present in lungs of all the experimental groups during the 5 days 
studied (Figure 4A). However, significantly lower viral titers were 
found in mice treated with HK1505 or PG1505 when compared 
to controls, being both treatments equally effective to reduce 
Figure 3 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on respiratory immune cell populations before and 
after the nasal administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two 
consecutive days and then challenged with three once-daily doses of poly(I:C). Non-treated infant mice challenged with poly(I:C) were used as controls. Before and 
2 days after poly(I:C) administration, the numbers of lung T cells (A) including CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, CD3+CD4+IL-10+, and CD3+CD8+IFN-γ+ T lymphocytes, as well as 
antigen presenting cells (B) including MHC-II+CD11c+CD11blowCD103+ and MHC-II+CD11c+CD11bhighCD103− dendritic cells, and CD45+CD11c+SiglecF+ alveolar 
macrophages were determined by flow cytometry. In addition, bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) neutrophils and lung CD45+CD11c−Gr1+ cells (C) were determined. 
The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, *P < 0.05.
7
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
RSV replication in the respiratory tract. Moreover, HK1505 and 
PG1505 significantly improved the body weight gain during RSV 
infection when compared to controls (Figure 4B). The markers 
of lung tissue damage in RSV-infected mice showed that the viral 
infection induced a significant cellular damage and alveolar– 
capillary barrier alterations (Figure 4C). Both, BAL LDH and 
albumin concentrations were significantly lower in infant 
mice previously treated with HK1505 or PG1505 than in RSVchallenged control mice (Figure 4C).
Nasally Administered Non-Viable  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 and Its 
Peptidoglycan Improve Resistance to 
Secondary Pneumococcal Pneumonia 
after Poly(I:C) Treatment
As mentioned before, respiratory viral infections increase the 
susceptibly of secondary bacterial pneumonia in infants. Taking 
into consideration the beneficial effects of nasal HK1505 (13) or 
PG1505 on the respiratory antiviral innate immune response, we 
next addressed whether these treatments where able to increase 
the resistance of infant mice to secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. For this purpose, we first performed comparative studies 
of secondary pneumococcal infection in Swiss albino and BALB/c 
mice that are naturally susceptible and resistant to pneumococci, 
respectively. We found that BALB/c mice, which are highly 
susceptible to poly(I:C) and RSV, were a better animal model 
for studying poly(I:C)-pneumococcal or RSV-pneumococcal 
infection than Swiss albino mice (data not shown). In line with 
our findings, some works have established that BALB/c mice 
are suitable for studying poly(I:C)-induced respiratory damage 
and RSV-bacterial infections. Stark et  al. (19) demonstrated 
that exposure of BALB/c mice to RSV significantly decreased  
S. pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, or Pseudomonas aeru­ginosa 
clearance. In addition, the work showed that the effect of RSV 
infection on bacterial clearance was dependent on the mouse 
genetic background by performing experiments with C57BL/6J 
and FVBN/J mice, which are relatively resistant and susceptible 
to RSV infection respectively. C57BL/6J mice showed a modest 
change in pneumococcal clearance following RSV challenge, 
whereas FVBN/J mice showed a decrease in pneumococcal clearance following RSV.
As shown in the experimental protocol illustrated in 
Figure 5A, mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505, 
stimulated with poly(I:C), and 5  days after the last poly(I:C) 
administration challenged with the respiratory bacterial 
pathogen S. pneumoniae. Pneumococcal colonization and bacteremia as well as lung tissue damage were evaluated on day 2 
post-pneumococcal challenge. Two doses (103 and 104 cells) of 
S. pneumoniae were evaluated. Pneumococci were detected in 
lungs (Figure 5B) and blood (Figure 5C) of control infant mice 
for the two doses of the respiratory pathogen. HK1505 significantly reduced lung bacterial cell counts and the dissemination 
of S. pneumoniae into the blood in infant mice infected with 
Figure 5 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the resistance to secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia after the nasal administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 
during two consecutive days, challenged with three once-daily doses of poly(I:C) and, infected with two different doses of Streptococcus pneumoniae 5 days after 
the last poly(I:C) administration (A). Non-treated infant mice stimulated with poly(I:C) and challenged with S. pneumoniae were used as controls. Lung bacterial cells 
counts (B), hemocultures (C), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and albumin concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (D,E), and lung histopathological 
examination (D,E) were determined on day 2 post-pneumococcal challenge. Scale bar = 100 μm. The results represent data from three independent experiments. 
Significant differences between treated and control groups, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
Figure 4 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the resistance to primary Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus (RSV) infection. Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days and then challenged with RSV. 
Non-treated infant mice challenged with the viral pathogen were used as controls. Lung RSV titers (A), changes in body weight (B), and lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and albumin concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (C) were evaluated on different time points after the viral 
challenge. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01.
8
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
Figure 6 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the respiratory immune response to 
secondary pneumococcal pneumonia after the nasal administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed 
with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days, challenged with three once-daily doses of poly(I:C) and, infected with two different doses of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 5 days after the last poly(I:C) administration. Non-treated infant mice stimulated with poly(I:C) and challenged with S. pneumoniae 
were used as controls. The levels of interferon (IFN)-β, IFN-γ, and interleukin (IL)-10 in bronchoalveolar lavages (A), as well as the numbers of lung 
CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, and CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T cells and CD45+CD11c+SiglecF+ alveolar macrophages (B) were determined before (day 0) and after (day 2) 
pneumococcal challenge. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
9
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
103 pneumococcal cells while no significant differences in these 
parameters were found in animals infected with 104 pneumococcal cells (Figure 5). Interestingly, PG1505 significantly reduced 
lung bacterial cell counts and the dissemination of the respiratory 
pathogen into the blood in infant mice infected with both 103 
and 104 pneumococcal cells (Figures 5B,C). Evaluation of lung 
tissue injury showed that secondary pneumococcal pneumonia 
induced a significant cellular damage and alveolar–capillary 
barrier alterations as demonstrated by the significant higher 
levels of BAL LDH and albumin when compared to basal levels 
(Figures 5D,E). Lung histological examination revealed inflammatory cell recruitment around alveoli and blood vessels, focal 
hemorrhage, and a significant reduction of gas exchange spaces 
(Figures 5D,E). Biochemical markers and histology also showed 
that lung tissue injuries were comparable in mice infected with 
both 103 and 104 pneumococcal cells. BAL LDH and albumin 
concentrations were significantly lower in infant mice treated 
with HK1505 or PG1505 when compared to controls for both 103 
and 104 pneumococcal cells (Figures 5D,E). Moreover, lung histology of HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice showed a significant 
reduction in the alterations of gas exchange spaces, hemorrhage, 
and inflammatory cells infiltration.
Nasally Administered Non-Viable  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 and Its 
Peptidoglycan Differentially Modulate  
the Immune Response Triggered by 
Secondary Pneumococcal Pneumonia
Our previous results indicate that IFN-β, IFN-γ, and IL-10 are 
involved in the immunoregulatory effects of nasally administered 
immunobiotics (12). Moreover, as we described in Figure 2, the 
levels of these three cytokines were significantly increased in the 
respiratory tract of HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice. Therefore, 
we aimed to investigate the levels of IFN-β, IFN-γ, and IL-10 
before (day 0) and after (day 2) the infection with S. pneumoniae 
as indicated in the experimental protocol of Figure 5A. The three 
cytokines were increased in HK1505 and PG1505 groups indicating that their elevated levels persisted up to 5 days of the last 
poly(I:C) administration (Figure 6A). Pneumococcal challenge 
10
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
further increase BAL IFN-β, IFN-γ, and IL-10 that were higher 
in HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice when compared to controls 
(Figure 6A). We also investigated the potential source of these 
cytokines within the immune cell populations of lungs. As we 
described previously, we found that IFN-γ and IL-10 were mainly 
produced by CD4+ T cells. In this work, we also demonstrated 
that IFN-β was mainly produced by alveolar macrophages and the 
CD45− population of lung (probably respiratory epithelial cells) 
(data not shown). Similar to the results of cytokines’ levels, we 
found that lung CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, and CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T cells 
as well as CD11c+SiglecF+IFN-β+ macrophages were significantly 
increased before and after the infection with S. pneumoniae in 
HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice when compared to control 
animals (Figure  6B). Of interest, both CD11c+SiglecF+IFN-β+ 
macrophages and BAL IFN-β levels were higher in the PG1505 
group than in HK1505 mice (Figure 6).
In order to further evaluate the role of IFN-β, IFN-γ, and 
IL-10 in the immunoregulatory effect of HK1505 and PG1505 
during secondary pneumococcal infection we used blocking antiIFN-β, anti-IFN-γ, and anti-IL-10R antibodies as described in the 
experimental protocol of Figure S2 in Supplementary Material. 
Treatment of mice with anti-IFN-β significantly abolished the 
capacity of HK1505 and PG1505 to avoid pneumococcal dissemination into the blood although it had no effect on lung bacterial 
cell counts (Figure 7A). In addition, the ability of HK1505 and 
PG1505 to protect against pulmonary damage was lost with antiIFN-β antibodies administration (Figure 7D). Treatment with 
anti-IFN-γ significantly abolished the capacity of HK1505 and 
PG1505 to reduce lung bacterial cell counts and had no effect 
on bacteremia (Figure 7B) or in the protection against lung tissue damage (Figure 7E). On the other hand, administration of 
anti-IL-10R to infant mice significantly abolished the capacity of 
HK1505 and PG1505 to reduce lung tissue injuries (Figure 7F), 
while they did not affect lung pneumococcal colonization or dissemination into the blood (Figure 7C).
Nasally Administered Non-Viable  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 and Its 
Peptidoglycan Improve Resistance to 
Secondary Pneumococcal Pneumonia 
after RSV Infection
Finally, we aimed to evaluate whether HK1505 or PG1505 treatments were able to protect against secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia after the infection of infant mice with RSV. For this 
purpose, mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505, 
infected with RSV, and 5  days after the infection they were 
challenged with 103 cells of S. pneumoniae. Similar to the experiments performed with poly(I:C), pneumococcal colonization 
and bacteremia were evaluated on day 2 post-pneumococcal 
challenge. In addition, RSV titers as well as lung tissue damage 
were studied before (day 0) and after (day 2) the infection with 
S. pneumoniae (Figure  8). RSV was detected in the lungs of 
infected infant mice before and after pneumococcal infection 
(Figure 8A). In addition, pneumococci were detected in lungs 
(Figure 8B) and blood (Figure 8C) of control infant mice. Both, 
HK1505 and PG1506 significantly reduced RSV titers as well as 
lung bacterial cell counts and the dissemination of S. pneumoniae into the blood (Figures 8A–C), which was in line with the 
improved survival of HK1505- and PG1506-treated mice when 
compared to controls (Figure 8D). Of interest, PG1505 was more 
effective than HK1505 to diminish lung bacterial cell counts. 
When lung injury was studied, it was observed that the secondary 
pneumococcal pneumonia induced a significant increase of the 
BAL biochemical parameters that evaluate cellular damage and 
alveolar–capillary barrier alterations (Figure  8E). In addition, 
histological examination of lungs showed a significant reduction 
of gas exchange spaces, inflammatory cell recruitment, and focal 
hemorrhage (Figure  8F). HK1505 and PG1505 significantly 
reduced pulmonary damage as demonstrated by the diminished 
BAL LDH and albumin concentrations and the lower histological 
alterations when compared to controls (Figures 8E,F).
DISCUSSION
It was established that the mortality associated to respiratory 
viral infections is not due to the viral infection alone but instead, 
secondary bacterial pneumonia complicates many severe cases 
in infected hosts (1–3). Therefore, it is crucial to understand 
how respiratory viral infections alter the host’s respiratory 
microenvironment and the local innate immunity to benefit the 
establishment of secondary bacterial infections, in order develop 
preventive or therapeutic strategies aimed to protect against mortality. Considering the elevated incidence of viral infections and 
the high frequency of associated secondary bacterial infections 
that contribute to aggravate the health status, several approaches 
are been investigated for preventing or treating respiratory superinfections, including antibiotics and immunomodulatory drugs 
(20). To our knowledge, no study has evaluated the potential 
protective ability of immunobiotics or their immunomodulatory 
cellular fractions in the context of a secondary bacterial pneumonia. Therefore, we demonstrated here for the first time, that 
the nasal priming with peptidoglycan from the immunobiotic  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 is able to improve the resistance of infant 
mice to primary RSV infection and secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia.
The first conclusion that can be obtained from the data presented in this work is that peptidoglycan from immunobiotic  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 preserves the immunomodulatory properties of the viable strain. We have demonstrated previously that 
the nasal priming with viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 beneficially 
modulates the respiratory immune response triggered by TLR3 
activation and increases the resistance to RSV infection (13). 
Similar to viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505, its purified peptidoglycan administered before the nasal challenge with three once-daily 
doses of poly(I:C) significantly increased the levels of BAL type 
I IFNs, especially IFN-β. Thus, PG1505 would enhance the 
expression of hundreds of IFNs-induced genes that counteract 
viral replication. This is in line with the improved resistance 
of PG1505-treated infant mice to the infectious challenge with 
RSV. Moreover, PG1505 differentially regulated the production 
of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in response to TLR3 
activation which are also important for the generation of an 
effective respiratory antiviral response. PG1505 improved the 
Figure 7 | Role of interferon (IFN)-β, IFN-γ, and interleukin (IL)-10 in the immunomodulatory effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and 
its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the resistance to secondary pneumococcal pneumonia after the nasal administration of the viral pathogen-associated molecular 
pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days, and then challenged with three once-daily doses of 
poly(I:C). On days 2 and 4 after poly(I:C) challenge, mice were nasally treated anti-IFN-β, anti-IFN-γ, or anti-IL-10 receptor (IL-10R) blocking antibodies. Control 
HK1505 and PG1505 received isotype control antibodies. Twelve hours later mice were challenged with Streptococcus pneumoniae. Lung bacterial cells counts 
and hemocultures (A–C), as well as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and albumin concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (D–F) were determined on 
day 2 post-pneumococcal challenge. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, 
*P < 0.05.
11
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
production of some cytokines (TNF-α, IL-10) while it reduced 
the levels of other pro-inflammatory factors (IL-6, MIP-1) 
indicating that the inflammatory response was differentially 
modulated. In fact, PG1505-treated mice showed an improved 
capacity to control RSV replication in the respiratory tract and a 
reduced inflammatory damage in the lung tissue. Resembling the 
effect of viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (13), PG1505 improved 
the numbers of CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, MHC-II+CD11blowCD103+, 
and MHC-II+CD11bhighCD103− DCs as well as the respiratory 
levels of IFN-γ indicating the generation of a Th1 response, that 
is also involved in the immune protection against respiratory viral 
attack. These results indicate that peptidoglycan is a key bacterial 
component involved in the immunomodulatory and antiviral 
capacity of the immunobiotic strain L. rhamnosus CRL1505.
An important finding of this work is that both HK1505 and 
PG1505 were able to differentially modulate the response of 
infant mice to the secondary pneumococcal pneumonia produced after the challenge with poly(I:C) or RSV. Slight but still 
significant reduction of pneumococcal cell counts were found in 
the lungs of HK1505- or PG1505-treated mice when compared 
Figure 8 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the resistance to secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia after the primary infection with Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV). Infant mice were nasally primed with HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days, 
challenged with RSV and, infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae 5 days after the viral infection. Non-treated infant mice infected with RSV and challenged with  
S. pneumoniae were used as controls. Lung RSV titers (A), lung bacterial cells counts (B), hemocultures (C), survival (D), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, and 
albumin concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (E), and lung histopathological examination (F) were determined on day 2 post-pneumococcal challenge. 
Scale bar = 100 μm. The results represent data from three independent experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, **P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01.
12
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
to controls. The effect of HK1505 and PG1505 in reducing lung 
pneumococcal cell counts was modest compared with our own 
previous studies. We had reported that the nasal administration 
of viable Lactococcus lactis NZ9000 to adult and infant mice 
reduced in more than 2 log S. pneumoniae cell counts in lungs 
(21). In addition, non-viable L. casei CRL431 (22), and non-viable 
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 or its peptidoglycan (15) allowed to 
immunocopromised malnourished mice to completely eliminate 
S. pneumoniae from lungs. Moreover, HK1505 and PG1505 
evaluated in an infant mice model of primary pneumococcal 
infection also reduced in more than 2 log S. pneumoniae cell 
counts in lungs when compared to untreated controls (data not 
shown). Then, immunobiotics and their cellular fractions would 
be more efficient to improve resistance to primary than secondary 
pneumococcal pneumonia.
Despite the modest results obtained by measuring the burden 
of the pathogen in the respiratory tract, PG1505 treatment was 
able to significantly reduce lung tissue damage and bacterial 
dissemination into the blood stream. These findings are of 
importance because studies in clinical trials (5, 6) and animal 
models of RSV-S. pneumoniae superinfection (7, 8) showed that 
enhanced lung injuries and elevated levels of bacteremia are 
critical factors that determine the severity of infection and the 
rate of mortality. In fact, PG1505-treated infant mice showed 
a significant improvement of survival after superinfection 
with RSV and S. pneumoniae. As mentioned before, several 
modifications induced by respiratory viruses are involved in 
facilitating S. pneumoniae infection, including the destruction of 
the respiratory epithelium, ciliary dyskinesia, enhancement of 
adhesion factors, and alterations of the immune response (7–10). 
In relation to immunopathology, it was reported that sequential 
infection with RSV and S. pneumoniae induced a significantly 
greater inflammation with high levels of infiltrated neutrophils 
and elevated levels of pro-inflammatory factors in the lung 
compared with mice that were inoculated with each pathogen 
separately (19). It is possible to speculate that the protective 
effect of PG1505 would be exerted at different levels. (a) The 
improvement of antiviral response and the consequent reduction 
of RSV titers in the lung, would contribute to the reduction of 
respiratory epithelium damage. (b) A reduction S. pneumoniae 
adhesion by diminishing the expression of RSV G protein and 
adhesion molecules in respiratory epithelial cells. In relation to 
this point, although we have not evaluated the impact of PG1505 
in the expression of adhesion molecules in the respiratory 
tract, our recent transcriptomic studies evaluating the effect of  
L. rhamnosus CRL1505 in poly(I:C) challenged intestinal epithelial cells showed that the immunobiotic strain is able to differentially modulate the expression of several adhesion molecules 
including selectins E and L as well as ICAM-1, and EPCAM (23). 
Therefore, evaluating the effect of PG1505 on the expression of 
13
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
relevant adhesion molecules in respiratory epithelial cells is an 
interesting topic for future investigations. (c) The differential 
modulation of the respiratory innate immune response that 
allow a reduction of RSV and S. pneumoniae replication with 
minimal inflammatory damage of lung tissue.
Our results suggest that pneumococcal growth in lungs, 
dissemination into blood, and inflammatory tissue damage 
are events which are not strictly coupled with each other. 
Moreover, they are regulated by different factors during the 
development of secondary pneumococcal pneumonia as 
became evident when experiment with blocking anti-IFN-β, 
anti-IFN-γ, and anti-IL-10R antibodies were performed. In 
line with our results, Damjanovic et  al. (24) demonstrated 
in a mice model of IFV-S. pneumoniae superinfection that 
uncontrolled bacterial outgrowth and excessive inflammation 
are not strictly coupled events, and that both are contributors 
to deleterious lung immunopathology and death. In fact, the 
work reported that the use of a bacteriostatic antibiotic effectively improved clinical outcome by controlling pneumococcal 
replication but it failed to significantly diminish pulmonary 
immunopathology. On the other hand, the use of dexamethasone slightly reduced immunopathology while it had no 
impact on bacterial clearance. Interestingly, administration of 
dexamethasone in combination the bacteriostatic antibiotic 
significantly improved pulmonary immunopathology, bacterial elimination, and most importantly the survival of infected 
mice (24). All these results together suggest that effective 
intervention strategies for respiratory superinfections need to 
involve an efficient control of pathogens growth and aberrant 
host inflammatory responses.
We found that at least three cytokines are involved in the 
immunomodulatory protective effect of HK1505 and PG1505 
in the respiratory superinfection: IL-10, IFN-β, and IFN-γ. Our 
results indicated that IL-10 was involved in the protection against 
inflammatory damage while IFN-γ participated in the reduction 
of pneumococcal growth in the lungs. This is in line with our previous findings demonstrating that the protection of infant mice 
against poly(I:C) or RSV challenge induced by viable L. rhamnosus 
CRL1505 was dependent of both IL-10 and IFN-γ (16). Moreover, 
as observed for viable L. rhamnosus CRL1505 (16), both HK1505 
and PG1505 improved the numbers of CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, and 
CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T  cells in the lungs of infant mice. These 
immune cell populations remained significantly elevated when 
compared to controls after pneumococcal challenge, indicating 
their participation in the protection against secondary bacterial 
pneumonia.
In addition, we showed that IFN-β was involved in the 
protection against lung tissue injury as well in the control of 
pneumococcal dissemination into the blood. The lung epithelial–endothelial layer is an important barrier in pneumococcal 
pathogenesis, since its alteration results in serious complications such as bacteremia and meningitis that are associated with 
high mortality. Some works have demonstrated an important 
role of IFN-β in the control of pneumococcal infection and 
invasiveness. Studies in IFNAR1 or IFN-β knockout mice 
showed that the abolishment of the IFN-β-IFNAR1 pathway 
increased nasopharyngeal carriage and enhanced mortality 
upon pneumococcal infection (25, 26). It was also demonstrated 
by LeMessurier et al. (27) that IFN-β increase the expression 
of tight junction proteins and reduce PAF receptor expression, 
which correlates with diminished pneumococcal invasion and 
transmigration of pulmonary epithelial and endothelial cells. In 
addition, intranasal administration of IFN-β was found to protect mice against the development of pneumococcal systemic 
disease (27). The role of IFN-β in secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia has been also studied. No significant differences in 
S. pneumoniae counts in the lungs of IFNAR1−/− and IFNAR1+/+ 
mice were observed after pneumococcal challenge. However, 
pneumococci were observed earlier and at higher numbers 
in blood samples of IFNAR1−/− mice compared to wild-type 
animals (27). We demonstrated here that the improvement of 
IFN-β by PG1505 treatment would be related to the enhancement of CD11c+SiglecF+IFN-β+ alveolar macrophages. This is in 
line with studies demonstrating that alveolar macrophages are 
the main producers of type I IFNs during pulmonary viral infections (28, 29). However, it should be noted that the primary type 
I IFN response is mediated not only by alveolar macrophages 
but also by epithelial cells of the respiratory tract (25, 27). 
Therefore, respiratory epithelial cells may represent promising 
cellular target for future mechanistic studies in order to explain 
the protective effect of PG1505.
Our results demonstrated that the modulation of the three 
cytokines (IFN-β, IFN-γ, and IL-10) are necessary to achieve protection against secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. Therefore, 
an appropriate balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory factors would be necessary in order to obtain full protection without 
affecting lung structure and function. In line with this statement, 
some works have demonstrated that the excessive production 
of one particular cytokine have negative consequences in the 
outcome of respiratory infections. It was showed that excessive 
production of IFN-β during viral infection induce impaired neutrophils responses due to inadequate production of neutrophil 
chemoattractants (30). Although neutrophils infiltration has 
been linked to lung tissue damage, the phagocytic and bactericidal activities of these cells are necessary for the initial control 
of pneumococci. In addition, it was observed that neutralization 
of IFN-γ in IFV-infected mice considerably diminished bacterial 
susceptibility and improved survival after secondary pneumococcal pneumonia (31). This effect was explained by the inhibition 
of bacterial phagocytosis by the excessive production of IFN-γ. 
Data obtained from mice infected with IFV and S. pneumoniae 
demonstrated that the exaggerated production of IL-10 was associated with increased pneumococcal colonization and enhanced 
mortality (32). The work showed that the treatment of mice with 
blocking anti-IL-10 antibodies before secondary pneumococcal 
infection resulted in reduced bacterial cell counts in lungs and 
prolonged survival (32). Moreover, it can be anticipated that other 
cytokines are involved in susceptibility to secondary bacterial respiratory infections. In this regard, recent findings of Chen et al. 
(33) demonstrated that the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-35 
contributes to the decreased resistance to secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. The work reported that IFV infection induced a 
high expression of IL-35 in the respiratory tract and that secondary pneumococcal infection leaded to a synergistic production 
14
Clua et al.
Immunobiotics Protect against Respiratory Superinfection
Frontiers in Immunology  |  www.frontiersin.org
August 2017  |  Volume 8  |  Article 948
of this cytokine. Lung enhancement of IL-35 inhibited the early 
immune response against S. pneumoniae.
In summary, we demonstrated that the nasal priming with 
peptidoglycan from L. rhamnosus CRL1505 differentially modulates the respiratory innate antiviral immune response triggered 
by TLR3 activation in infant mice, improving the resistance to 
primary RSV infection, and secondary pneumococcal pneumonia. In association with the protection against RSV-pneumococcal 
superinfection, we found that peptidoglycan from L. rhamnosus 
CRL1505 significantly improved lung CD3+CD4+IFN-γ+, and 
CD3+CD4+IL-10+ T cells as well as CD11c+SiglecF+IFN-β+ alveolar macrophages with the consequent increases of IFN-γ, IL-10, 
and IFN-β in the respiratory tract. Our results also demonstrated 
that the increase of the three cytokines is necessary to reduce 
the severity of the respiratory superinfection since each of them 
are involved in different aspect of the secondary pneumococcal 
pneumonia that have to be controlled in order to reduce the severity of the infectious disease: lung pneumococcal colonization, 
bacteremia, and inflammatory-mediated lung tissue injury. The 
findings of this work will lead us in new directions to explore the 
molecular mechanisms via which peptidoglycan from L. rhamnosus CRL1505 interacts with immune and non-immune cells of the 
respiratory tract and to investigate whether its immunomodulatory properties are unique or common to peptidoglycans of other 
immunobiotic strains with antiviral capabilities.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals of the Guidelines for Animal Experimentation of 
CERELA and all efforts were made to minimize suffering.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SA, HK, and JV designed the study and wrote the manuscript. PC, 
PK, HZ, AT, AK, and SS did the laboratory work. PC, PK, SS, and 
JV performed statistical analysis. SS, SA, HK, and JV contributed 
to data analysis and interpretation. All authors read and approved 
the manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 
(B) (2) (No. 16H05019), Challenging Exploratory Research (No. 
16K15028) and Open Partnership Joint Projects of JSPS Bilateral 
Joint Research Projects from the Japan Society for the Promotion 
of Science (JSPS) to HK and by an ANPCyT–FONCyT Grant 
PICT-2013 (No. 3219) to JV. This work was also supported by 
JSPS Core-to-Core Program A (Advanced Research Networks) 
entitled: “Establishment of international agricultural immunology research-core for a quantum improvement in food safety.”
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at 
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fimmu.2017.00948/
full#supplementary-material.
Figure S1 | Role of interferon (IFN)-β, IFN-γ, and interleukin (IL)-10 in the 
immunomodulatory effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 
(HK1505) and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on the resistance to secondary 
pneumococcal pneumonia after the nasal administration of the viral pathogenassociated molecular pattern poly(I:C). Infant mice were nasally primed with 
HK1505 or PG1505 during two consecutive days, and then challenged with 
three once-daily doses of poly(I:C). On days 2 and 4 after poly(I:C) challenge, 
mice were nasally treated anti-IFN-β, anti-IFN-γ, or anti-IL-10 receptor blocking 
antibodies. Control HK1505 and PG1505 received isotype control antibodies. 
Twelve hours later mice were challenged with Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Figure S2 | Effect of non-viable Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (HK1505) 
and its peptidoglycan (PG1505) on blood cytokines. HK1505 or PG1505 were 
nasally administered to infant mice during two consecutive days. Non-treated 
infant mice were used as controls. Levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, 
interferon (IFN)-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-10, and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) were determined in bronchoalveolar lavages 
(BAL) (A) and serum (B). The results represent data from three independent 
experiments. Significant differences between treated and control groups, 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
