MINI REVIEW
published: 05 August 2020
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.00420
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
1
August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 420
Edited by:
Rodolfo García-Contreras,
National Autonomous University of
Mexico, Mexico
Reviewed by:
Michael Bachman,
University of Michigan, United States
Srijon Kaushik Banerjee,
University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, United States
Yael González Tinoco,
Center for Scientiﬁc Research and
Higher Education in Ensenada
(CICESE), Mexico
*Correspondence:
Sebastian Leptihn
Leptihn@intl.zju.edu.cn
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Infectious Diseases - Surveillance,
Prevention and Treatment,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Medicine
Received: 15 May 2020
Accepted: 30 June 2020
Published: 05 August 2020
Citation:
Manohar P, Loh B, Nachimuthu R,
Hua X, Welburn SC and Leptihn S
(2020) Secondary Bacterial Infections
in Patients With Viral Pneumonia.
Front. Med. 7:420.
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.00420
Secondary Bacterial Infections in
Patients With Viral Pneumonia
Prasanth Manohar 1,2, Belinda Loh 1, Ramesh Nachimuthu 3, Xiaoting Hua 4,5,
Susan C. Welburn 1,6 and Sebastian Leptihn 1,4,6*
1 Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh (ZJU-UoE) Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, China, 2 School of Medicine,
The Second Afﬁliated Hospital Zhejiang University (SAHZU), Hangzhou, China, 3 Antibiotic Resistance and Phage Therapy
Laboratory, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore, India, 4 Department of
Infectious Diseases, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China, 5 Key Laboratory
of Microbial Technology and Bioinformatics of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China, 6 Infection Medicine, Biomedical
Sciences, Edinburgh Medical School, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom
Pulmonary diseases of viral origin are often followed by the manifestation of secondary
infections, leading to further clinical complications and negative disease outcomes. Thus,
research on secondary infections is essential. Here, we review clinical data of secondary
bacterial infections developed after the onset of pulmonary viral infections. We review
the most recent clinical data and current knowledge of secondary bacterial infections
and their treatment in SARS-CoV-2 positive patients; case reports from SARS-CoV,
MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV2 and the best-studied respiratory virus, inﬂuenza, are described.
We outline treatments used or prophylactic measures employed for secondary bacterial
infections. This evaluation includes recent clinical reports of pulmonary viral infections,
including those by COVID-19, that reference secondary infections. Where data was
provided for COVID-19 patients, a mortality rate of 15.2% due to secondary bacterial
infections was observed for patients with pneumonia (41 of 268). Most clinicians treated
patients with SARS-CoV-2 infections with prophylactic antibiotics (63.7%, n = 1,901),
compared to 73.5% (n = 3,072) in all clinical reports of viral pneumonia included in this
review. For all cases of viral pneumonia, a mortality rate of 10.9% due to secondary
infections was observed (53 of 482). Most commonly, quinolones, cephalosporins and
macrolides were administered, but also the glycopeptide vancomycin. Several bacterial
pathogens appear to be prevalent as causative agents of secondary infections, including
antibiotic-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Keywords: secondary bacterial infection, pulmonary viruses, viral pneumonia, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, inﬂuenza,
SARS, antibiotic resistance
INTRODUCTION
Viruses causing respiratory tract infections have been the cause of high morbidities
and mortality rates worldwide, often in a seasonal manner for decades (1). In the
last
20
years,
the
world
has
experienced
six
major
outbreaks
of
infectious
agents
(SARS-CoV: 2002-2004; H1N1 Inﬂuenza: 2009–2010; MERS-CoV: 2012–2020; Ebola virus:
2013–2016; Zika virus: 2015–2016; SARS-CoV-2: 2019-present), infection with four of
which (SARS-CoV, H1N1 Inﬂuenza, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2) result in respiratory tract
infections. During the emergency of a viral disease, attention is initially focussed on
Manohar et al.
Secondary Infections During Viral Pneumonia
clinical management of the primary infection, but it is imperative
to consider secondary bacterial infections that develop in patients
during or following initial infection. In addition, co-infections
- the simultaneous infection with a second pathogen of viral
or bacterial origin- can also occur and ultimately result in the
same outcome: The patient suﬀers from complications caused
by two diﬀerent pathogens (2, 3). One major complication of
viral infections, especially pulmonary viruses, is colonization of
the viral aﬀected organs by bacteria which is associated with
high morbidity and mortality rates (Figure 1A), following a
weakened immune response and/or opportunistic and accessible
routes of entry for bacterial pathogen(s) (4). While secondary
bacterial infections or superinfections are largely a consequence
of immune susceptibility caused by the primary viral infection,
co-infections are multiple infections (viral/bacterial/yeast) that
occur simultaneously. Co-infections, secondary infections or
“superinfections” are common during viral pandemics. The 1918
Spanish Flu pandemic saw around 50 million deaths ascribed
to bacterial co-infections and during the 2009 H1N1 Inﬂuenza
pandemic up to 34% of all deaths were a result of bacterial coinfections (5). These complications are often neglected in the
clinical record (Figure 1B) (6, 7).
While the precise mechanism for susceptibility to secondary
infections is poorly understood, it is likely that virus-mediated
immunosuppression
of
the
host
innate
immune
enables
opportunistic bacteria to colonize the host as it was shown for
Streptococcus (8). Most studies on host-pathogen interactions
focus
on
a
single-pathogen,
one-host
model
although
mammalian hosts are simultaneously exposed to multiple
(opportunistic) pathogens (9). The immune response to one
FIGURE 1 | (A) Possible disease progression after infection with a respiratory virus. (B) Overview of case reports of all respiratory virus infection data reviewed in this
study, including rate of secondary bacterial infections, antibiotic use and pathogenic bacteria identiﬁed.
pathogen may alter the immunity to other infectious agent(s),
resulting in increased prevalence of viral-induced secondary
bacterial infections (10). Mammalian cells are more susceptible
to bacterial attachment and colonization when infected by a
virus (11, 12); infection with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),
rhinovirus and inﬂuenza virus (all of which damage the mucosal
layer), lead to bacterial adherence of Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, and
bioﬁlm formation on the linings of the airways (13).
Common bacteria isolated during secondary infections
include
Staphylococcus
aureus,
S.
pneumoniae,
Neisseria
meningitides, H. inﬂuenzae, Klebsiella pneumoniae and members
of the Proteus, Enterobacter and Citrobacter spp. (14). During
active viral infections, the route of infection, proximity of
infection as well as virulence factors varies between bacterial
strains resulting in diﬀerent outcomes. Eﬀective treatment of
both the viral and the secondary bacterial infection(s) is of
critical importance. Antiviral treatments deployed initially do
not treat secondary bacterial infections (15). The preferred
treatment for bacterial infections is generally broad-spectrum
antibiotics, but this can result in undesirable side eﬀects that have
a negative impact on the normal microﬂora of the host (16–18).
Susceptible individuals within a population can be protected
from risk of some common bacterial pathogens that are also
capable to cause secondary infections, for example pneumonia, if
vaccines are available; furthermore, the immune system is often
capable of ﬁghting bacterial infections alone, while during a
virus-bacterial infection, the complex immune responses might
be inapt to eliminate bacterial-induced disease complications
(19). To reduce severe disease progression or lethal outcomes,
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
2
August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 420
Manohar et al.
Secondary Infections During Viral Pneumonia
alternative ways to alleviate complications due to secondary
bacterial infections and to eliminate bacterial pathogens while
preserving host immunity might be necessary.
Secondary infections can also be acquired from the patient’s
environment i.e., hospital-acquired or nosocomial infections.
Nosocomial pathogens are often resistant to a wide range
of antibiotics; a result of increased use of antibiotics and
decades of over- and misuse resulting in selection for multidrug resistant pathogens (MDR pathogens) (20). MDR is
a global problem with >50,000 people per year infected,
of which in ∼25% of the cases no eﬀective antibiotic is
available (21) as many major pharmaceutical stakeholders have
discontinued their search for new chemical antimicrobials (22).
Antibiotic resistant organisms include Methicillin-resistant
S. aureus (MRSA), Drug-resistant Streptococcus, Vancomycinresistant Enterococci (VRE), drug-resistant Mycobacterium,
Carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae
(CRE),
Colistinresistant
Klebsiella,
Carbapenem-resistant
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
(20). If a patient with a viral infection is unfortunate to become
infected by MDR bacteria, no standard treatment is currently
available. In one COVID-19 cohort study, described in more
detail below; almost 50% (10 of 21) patients developed secondary
bacterial infections in the lung caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Staphylococcus, Acinetobacter baumannii, and E. coli, ultimately
leading to their death, despite receiving prophylactic antibiotic
therapy (23).
This evaluation of all the COVID-19 reports available that
reference secondary infections showed that most clinicians
prescribed meropenem and linezolid to children with a rate of
prophylactic treatment between 19.4 and 100.0% (24). In adults
mainly quinolones, cephalosporins and macrolides were used for
treatment with rates of prophylaxis between 13.2 and 100.0%. In
most cases, etiological evidence was not used for therapeutic use
of antibiotics.
In this study, we have assimilated the most recent clinical data
on bacterial secondary infections associated with pneumonias,
caused by pulmonary viruses, including for SARS-CoV-2. We
outline treatments used or prophylactic measures employed
for secondary bacterial infections. This review focuses on
secondary bacterial infections that occur in the respiratory
tissue of patients suﬀering from a viral infection, as most lung
infections by secondary bacterial pathogens remain localized in
the respiratory tract, while a small percentage leads to infections
that spread systematically.
COVID-19 RELATED SECONDARY
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS AND
TREATMENT
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded
RNA virus, belonging to the family Coronaviridae. The virus
emerged in 2019 and is responsible for respiratory illnesses
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) that results in respiratory
tract infections and causes severe lung damage in most fatal cases.
SARS-CoV-2 has overwhelmed health systems, with numbers
of those infected with COVID-19 requiring hospitalization and
critical care.
Early stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection typically include
symptoms of mild fever and shortness of breath (25). As the
virus replicates in the respiratory tract, the symptoms worsen
and once the virus reaches and begins infecting the alveoli, the
host responds by generating inﬂammatory factors in alveolar
tissues that may result in pneumonia. In almost all severe cases,
SARS-CoV-2 infection results in pneumonia and the inﬂamed
ﬂuid-ﬁlled alveolar tissue now is an ideal habitat for bacterial
growth for pathogens including P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. The
causative agent resulting in a severe disease progression may be
bacteria, virus or fungi (26).
The
presence
of
secondary
bacterial
infections
in
those
infected
with
SARS-CoV-2
complicates
treatment
(26,
27).
An
overview
of
all
COVID-19
case
studies,
available
as
Supplementary Information,
where
we
have
analyzed 15 case studies reporting SARS-CoV-2 infection
(Supplemental Data Sheet 1). In particular for data obtained
from clinical observations in China, COVID-19 patients are most
commonly treated with antibiotics (azithromycin, moxiﬂoxacin,
ceftriaxone, vancomycin, cefepime) to reduce the risk of
nosocomial infections, a prophylactic strategy. Should a bacterial
infection occur despite the prophylactic use of antibiotics, caused
by bacteria that are resistant to one or more drugs, diﬀerent
combinations of the same drugs are being used for the treatment,
as a therapeutic strategy. Both strategies, the prophylactic and
the therapeutic use of antibiotics, deploy the same types and
dosage of drugs: however the prophylactic use of antibiotics is
not recommended by most health institutions and governments
around the globe, due to the observed increase in antibiotic
resistance rates, which correlate with the overuse (and misuse)
of antibiotics (28, 29). However, the risk of superinfection
with
MDR
bacteria
poses
additional
challenges
for
the
treatment of severely sick COVID-19 patients in intensive care
units (ICU).
CASE REPORTS OF ANTIBACTERIAL
THERAPY IN COVID-19 PATIENTS
Fifteen clinical reports, for which data for secondary infections
were available, mainly from hospitals in China, were examined
to provide information of the occurrence, treatment of or
prophylactic measures for bacterial secondary infections during
the course of COVID-19 infections (Supplementary File). A
total of 3,133 COVID-19 patient cases were detailed in the 15
reports (25–39). Prophylactic antibiotic therapy was given to
1,901 of the 2,983 patients (63.7%). We excluded one study
(patient n = 150), as they did not report details on the antibiotic
therapy (31) and 5/14 studies did not report the type of antibiotics
used. The most commonly used antibiotics were moxiﬂoxacin (n
= 452, 39.2%) and azithromycin (n = 294, 30.7%). Others include
ceftriaxone, vancomycin, cefepime, cephalosporins, quinolones,
carbapenems,
tigecycline,
doxycycline,
and
cefoperazone.
In total, 10 studies reported secondary bacterial infections,
with 273 of the 997 patients (27.3%) being infected. Again,
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
3
August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 420
Manohar et al.
Secondary Infections During Viral Pneumonia
we excluded 5 studies (patients n = 2,136), which did not
report any information on any clinical complications other
than caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus (28, 30, 34, 35, 37).
The most common bacterial infections were caused by the
Gram-positive pathogen Staphylococcus aureus or by strains
of the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae. Five
studies reported infections that were conﬁrmed by tests in
a microbiology laboratory, which identiﬁed MRSA, MSSA,
Serratia, Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, E. coli, H. inﬂuenza,
and E. cloacae (patients n = 16) (25, 26, 29, 36, 38). Three
studies reported therapeutic antibiotic treatment in 92 of 146
patients (63%), which were administered as secondary bacterial
infections were observed (29, 35, 39). Four studies reported
complications with fatal outcome due to bacterial infections that
included 41 of 268 patients (15.2%) (26, 27, 33, 39). An overview
of the studies can be found in Supplementary Figure 1,
which
also
provides
the
information
on
percentages
of
antibiotic
use
and
types
of
antibiotic
compounds,
among others.
These clinical reports provide insights into the complications
and challenges faced in treating SARS-CoV-2 infected patients.
Patients with pneumonia caused by other respiratory viruses
or SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia patients were often prophylactically
treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, in an attempt to
reduce the risk of bacterial superinfections. Complications were
observed in patients that were not treated with antibiotics.
Antibiotic-resistant infections, in particular, nosocomial hospital-acquired - infections were common for more than
one
third
of
ICU
patients,
posing
a
threat
to
disease
progression, often resulting in the death of the aﬀected
individual (26, 40).
SARS-RELATED SECONDARY BACTERIAL
INFECTIONS AND TREATMENT
Severe
Acute
Respiratory
Syndrome-related
Coronavirus
(SARS) Co-V, was ﬁrst report in Guangdong Province, China
in November 2002. At its initial outbreak (until August 2003),
8,096 probable cases were reported with an ∼10% fatality rate
(41). Further sporadic cases were reported in November 2003
through April 2004 (42). The case studies showed the occurrence
of bacterial co-infections in the large number of patients. These
include infections by MRSA, Klebsiella spp., P. aeruginosa and
Streptococcus (43). The large multinucleated cells observed in
the lungs of the SARS patients may be due to the underlining
bacterial infections (43). The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to
cover the secondary bacterial infections is one of the supportive
cares during SARS outbreak (44) (Supplementary File). The
case studies (n = 7) reported the disease progression of a total
of 534 SARS-CoV patients (45–51) (Supplementary File).
Details about prophylactic antibiotic therapy was reported
in ﬁve studies (patients n = 385) and 100% patients were
treated with prophylactic antibiotic therapy (48, 50–53). The
antibiotics used for prophylactic treatment were levoﬂoxacin,
clarithromycin,
amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid,
piperacillintazobactum, maxipime, azithromycin, amoxicillin-clavulanate,
cefoperazone/sulbactam,
quinolone
plus
azithromycin,
levoﬂoxacin, moxiﬂoxacin, and ceftriaxone plus azithromycin,
and most commonly azithromycin (n = 206, 74.6%). Of
the four studies that reported secondary bacterial infections,
35 of 306 patients (11.4%) became infected. The pathogens
that caused the infections included P. aeruginosa, MRSA,
S. pneumoniae, K. pneumoniae, Enterococci, Acinetobacter
baumannii, Enterobacter, H. inﬂuenza, S. maltophilia, and
Serratia (45, 47, 49, 51). Despite the deployment of prophylactic
antibiotics, the use of therapeutic antibiotics was reported
in
three
studies,
administering
amoxicillin-clavulanate,
clarithromycin,
azithromycin,
levoﬂoxacin,
moxiﬂoxacin
and ceftriaxone plus azithromycin (47, 49, 51). In total, 12
patients out of 23 (52%, described in two studies who provided
the respective information) had complications due to secondary
bacterial infections (47, 51).
During the 2002 outbreak, most SARS patients were treated
with broad-spectrum antibiotics as a prophylactic therapy.
Contributing factors on antibiotic resistance had not been
fully established by the early 2000’s; however the use of
antibiotics as a precaution in many viral infections and
their potential overuse may have contributed to the current
antibiotic crisis.
MERS-RELATED SECONDARY BACTERIAL
INFECTIONS AND TREATMENT
The ﬁrst cases of the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
CoV epidemic occurred in June 2012 in Saudi Arabia with later
outbreaks observed in 2015 and 2018. To date around 2,519 cases
have been reported from more than 20 countries with a high
fatality rate 34.3% (n = 866), the highest among all coronavirus
diseases (52). The infection often starts as a mild viral respiratory
illness but can rapidly progress to a fatal viral pneumonia mostly
complicated by ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) and
ARF (acute renal failure) (53). Due to the high mortality rate
of MERS infections, the impact of the occurrence of bacterial
infections remains unclear as death occurs due to hypoxemia
and bilateral interstitial inﬁltrates in most cases, or ARDS.
Nosocomial bacterial pneumonia is however common among
MERS patients with ventilator support. Therefore, antibiotic
therapy was commonly deployed with secondary bacterial
infections rarely occurring under this treatment regime (53–55).
Here, we review MERS-related case studies, outlining antibiotic
therapies and bacterial infections. A total of 138 MERS-CoV
infected patients were reported (55–59) (Supplementary File).
The use of prophylactic antibiotic therapy was reported in 4
out of 5 studies. Sixty eight patients were treated with the
antibiotics piperacillin-tazobactam, azithromycin, ceftriaxone
and trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole, levoﬂoxacin, imipenem
and other broad-spectrum antibiotics (55, 56, 58, 59). The
development of secondary bacterial infection was reported in
two studies, with 32 of 82 patients experiencing complications
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
4
August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 420
Manohar et al.
Secondary Infections During Viral Pneumonia
due to bacterial pathogens (55, 57). The most common
bacteria were MRSA, while others included carbapenem-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii, VRE and S. pneumoniae. No detailed
report was provided about treatment antibiotics and one study
reported (patients n = 15) complications due to bacterial
infections in intensive care units (55).
INFLUENZA VIRUSES AND SECONDARY
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Inﬂuenza viruses are known to cause seasonal ﬂu every year
and of the four inﬂuenza types, type A and B are known
to cause seasonal epidemics (60). The inﬂuenza A (H1N1)
outbreak in 2009 had even developed into a global pandemic
while causing seasonal ﬂu epidemics each year. In spite of
the availability of vaccines, the global death during the ﬂu
season was estimated to be between 0.25 and 0.5 million people
according to the WHO (61). Secondary bacterial infections are
one of the leading causes for inﬂuenza associated deaths (62).
According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), during the 2009 H1N1 inﬂuenza pandemic between
29 and 55% of mortalities were due to secondary bacterial
infections (63). The lethal synergism between inﬂuenza virus
and Pneumococcus strains accounts for the majority of diseases
as well as mortality during inﬂuenza epidemics (64). Here, we
summarize case studies that are related to inﬂuenza viruses and
secondary bacterial infections (Supplementary File). Details on
treatment and disease progression of a total of 910 patients
that were infected with inﬂuenza were reported in eight
case studies (65–72). Five studies reported the deployment of
prophylactic antibiotic therapy in 718 of 743 patients (96.6%)
(65–67, 71, 72). The most commonly used antibiotics were
vancomycin (n = 317, 46.2%) and imipenem/meropenem
(n = 243, 54.7%). Others were azithromycin, ceftriaxone,
cephalosporin, piperacillin-tazobactam, linezolid, vancomycin
plus cefepime, vancomycin plus meropenem, clarithromycin,
levoﬂoxacin and dicloxacillin. In total, 223 patients of 910
(24.5%) developed secondary bacterial infections. The infective
agents were S. pneumoniae, MRSA, P. aeruginosa, S. viridians,
S. hominis, Enterococci, H. inﬂuenza, S. pyogenes, S. mitis,
S. agalactiae, Acinetobacter baumannii, E. coli, Chlamydophila
pneumoniae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. To treat the infections,
one of the studies reported the use of azithromycin, vancomycin,
ceftriaxone and cephalosporin (65). In general, all eight case
studies reported the treatment complications due to secondary
bacterial infections.
DISCUSSION
The lack of detailed clinical data regarding secondary bacterial
infections following COVID-19, SARS, MERS and inﬂuenza is
surprising. In addition, precise numbers of clinical cases of
COVID-19 or other respiratory virus infections with antibioticresistant secondary bacterial infections are not available.
As globally mortality rates from antibiotic-resistant bacterial
infections are increasing, providing such data of secondary
infection is important, almost critical.
Clinical reports are a valuable source for biomedical scientists
for the advancement of treatment; however, in many cases
crucial data such as medical compounds, their dosage, and
duration of the therapy, is often not reported, similar to
details on patient data or the species of e.g., a pathogenic
bacterium. Such data are essential for the study of secondary
infections in human patients; the scientiﬁc community and
ultimately the patient will beneﬁt when clinicians and nonclinical disease experts work close together. The information
from such collaborative studies can provide a guideline for
treatment. At the same time, the lack of knowledge and
studies that should be done in the future is evident. Reviewing
the available information, it becomes clear that secondary
bacterial infections play a critical role in the morbidity and
mortality rates of patients initially falling ill with pulmonary
viral diseases. Similar to epidemics caused by inﬂuenza viruses,
during the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, antibiotic-resistant
bacterial infections are a signiﬁcant threat to the well-being
of hospitalized COVID-19 patients. Nosocomial infections
including ventilator-associated infections are often unavoidable
and especially so during a pandemic. The use of broad-spectrum
antibiotics is often a routine preventative measure and until
alternative treatments and to this date unavailable preventive
measures are in place at hospitals, secondary infections will
remain unavoidable due to the nature of nosocomial and
opportunistic pathogens in combination with the rise of
multidrug resistance.
COVID-19 is likely to reappear in populations until a
vaccine is deployed, globally. To prepare for recurrent waves of
COVID-19 disease and the inevitable next new pandemic, new
antibiotics or alternative treatments targeted against secondary
bacterial infections are needed. Alternative therapies such as
Antimicrobial Peptides or Phage Therapy are being explored
and show promise. Most antimicrobial peptides perturb the
structure of the bacterial cell envelope while not aﬀecting the
eukaryotic cell membrane; eventually creating a leaky lipid
bilayer and the collapse of the proton-motif-force, ultimately
resulting in bacterial cell death (73–76). Phage therapy makes
use of bacterial viruses (or bacteriophages) that speciﬁcally infect
bacterial pathogens for viral replication, which leads to the
lysis of the host when phage progeny is being released (77–
83). Anti-virulence compounds are substances that do not kill
or arrest the growth of a bacterial pathogen, but rather target
pathogen-intrinsic components important for the infection
process. These include bacterial components such as exo- and
endotoxins, i.e., actively secreted toxins (e.g., hemolysins) or
cell-inherent structures that are toxic to the patient, such
as LPS, and other factors which facilitate adhesion, invasion
or colonization, but also the escape of the host’s immune
system. Anti-virulence compounds have been demonstrated
to prevent or reduce the severity of symptoms of acute
infections (84, 85).
Pulmonary coronaviruses will likely be a clinical challenge for
many years to come. Viral pandemics from coronaviruses and
emerging pathogens are inevitable in a globalized world with
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
5
August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 420
Manohar et al.
Secondary Infections During Viral Pneumonia
interconnected societies, travel and commerce. We should be
well-prepared for the next pandemic, exploring and establishing
new avenues to treat bacterial pathogens commonly observed
in secondary infections to avert a healthcare crisis due
to antibiotic-resistance.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PM and SL: initial idea. RN and XH: review and comments.
BL and SL: ﬁgures. PM, BL, SW, and SL: concept and
writing. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Global Challenges Research Fund (the University
of Edinburgh) and acknowledge the support by the Zhejiang
University Special Scientiﬁc Research Fund for COVID-19
prevention and control (2020XGZX037).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.
2020.00420/full#supplementary-material
Supplementary Figure 1 | Overview of case reports of SARS-CoV-2 infection
data reviewed in this study, including rate of secondary bacterial infections,
antibiotic use and pathogenic bacteria identiﬁed.
Supplementary File | Tables summarizing case reports of patients with
pulmonary virus infections and clinical interventions to prevent or cure secondary
bacterial infections.
Supplemental Data Sheet 1 | Case reports of patients with secondary bacterial
infections.
