REVIEW
published: 19 May 2020
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00225
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Edited by:
Margarita Sáiz,
Severo Ochoa Molecular Biology
Center (CSIC-UAM), Spain
Reviewed by:
Xavier Saelens,
Ghent University, Belgium
Catherine Ptaschinski,
University of Michigan, United States
*Correspondence:
David Verhoeven
davidver@iastate.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Virus and Host,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection
Microbiology
Received: 25 February 2020
Accepted: 22 April 2020
Published: 19 May 2020
Citation:
Thornhill EM and Verhoeven D (2020)
Respiratory Syncytial Virus’s
Non-structural Proteins:
Masters of Interference.
Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10:225.
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00225
Respiratory Syncytial Virus’s
Non-structural Proteins:
Masters of Interference
Elena Margaret Thornhill and David Verhoeven*
Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States
Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) is a highly prevalent virus that affects the majority of
the population. The virus can cause severe disease in vulnerable populations leading
to high hospitalization rates from bronchiolitis or secondary bacterial infections leading
to pneumonia. Two early and non-structural proteins (Ns1 and Ns2), strongly over-ride
the antiviral innate system but also diminish the adaptive response as well. This review
will cover interactions of Ns1 and Ns2 with the host antiviral response with a focus
on alterations to signaling pathways, cytokine gene expression, and effects of the Ns
proteins on mitochondria.
Keywords: nonstructural (NS) proteins, respiratory syncitial virus, antiviral pathway, innate immunity, mitochondria
INTRODUCTION
Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) is a highly prevalent and infectious virus. Moreover, most
individuals have contracted the virus by the age of one, and half of all children over the age of two
have contracted RSV at least twice (Glezen et al., 1986). RSV causes almost 60,000 hospitalizations
of children under 5 years of age in the U.S. alone and is responsible for 10,000 geriatric U.S. deaths
each year (Falsey and Walsh, 2005; Rose et al., 2018). In adults, RSV infection often mimics that
of the common cold, with symptoms occasionally reaching the severity of ﬂu, but is often more
severe in infants and the elderly (RSV Symptoms Care, 2018). Severe RSV infection can result in
bronchiolitis, which is inﬂammation of the bronchioles in the lung and is the main reason children
need hospitalization. RSV infection also results in a high number of secondary bacterial infections
(Heikkinen et al., 1999; Weinberger et al., 2015). Moreover, bacterial pneumonia is attributable
to RSV in 20.3% of children aged 1 year or younger and in 10.1% of children aged 1 to 2 years
old. In contrast, bacterial pneumonia attributable to inﬂuenza infection occurs in only 3.2% of
children aged 1 to 2 years (Weinberger et al., 2015). RSV is the primary catalyst for secondary ear
infections, with RSV, detected in the middle-ear ﬂuid of 48 of the 65 children (74%) with acute
otitis media (Heikkinen et al., 1999). RSV is a fascinating virus impacting large portions of the
population and yet knowledge about the viral life cycle and regulation is limited. Importantly, there
is still no licensed vaccine for RSV despite the decades of attempts highlighting a need for better
understanding the viral pathogenesis and mechanisms fostering immunity.
VIRAL BIOLOGY AND CELL ANTIVIRAL PATHWAY ACTIVATION
RSV is an enveloped negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus of the family Pneumoviridae and
the order Mononegavirales. RSV, and like other RNA viruses, triggers the toll-like receptor (TLR)
and the RIG-I (Retinoic acid-inducible gene I) pathways upon infection to initiate a signal cascade
that leads to the production of type 1 interferons (IFN). This activation pathway is summarized
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
in Figure 1. While RSV proteins or RNAs interact with multiple
TLR’s including TLR2 and TLR4, the TLR’s that are involved in
eliciting the interferon response, like many other RNA viruses,
are TLR3 and TLR7.
TLR3, upon binding to dsRNA (double-stranded RNA),
becomes activated and recruits TRIF (TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing interferon-β), which proceeds to initiate a
signal cascade that activates TRAF3 and TRAF6 (TNF receptorassociated factors). In turn, this activates IKK (IκB kinase).
After activation of IKK by TRAF3, IRF3, and IRF7 (Interferon
Regulatory Factors) are the next molecules to be activated in
the pathway. This leads to the production of NF-κB (nuclear
factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) and the
induction of type 1 interferon production. IKK activation by
TRAF6 does not activate IRF3 or IRF7 but still induces a NFκB response and leads to the production of type 1 interferons
(Ning et al., 2011; Shin and Harris, 2011; Kawasaki and Kawai,
2014).
TLR7 binds to and is activated by ssRNA (single-stranded
RNA), subsequently acting via recruiting MyD88 and signaling
the
cell
through
its
pathway.
MyD88
activates
IRAK4
(Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase), which then activates
FIGURE 1 | Interferon signaling pathway altered by Ns. TLR7 pathway’s arrows are in orange and activation leads to activation of NF-κB and IFN induction. TLR3
pathway’s arrows are in yellow. Activation of TRIF by TLR3 can either activate TRAF3 or TRAF6. Whichever one is activated leads to slight variations in the cascade.
The IFNR pathway’s arrows are in green and the RIG-I pathway is in blue.
IRAK1 activating TRAF6. TRAF6 activation in the MyD88
pathway leads to activation of IRF7, which then activates NF-κB
and the induction of type 1 interferon production (Ning et al.,
2011; Kawasaki and Kawai, 2014; Suthers and Sarantopoulos,
2017).
Type 1 interferons function as antiviral defense mechanisms
and as a way of alerting other cells in the vicinity of an
invader. Type I IFNs consist of seven classes, including IFNα
and IFNβ. IFNα and IFNβ are produced by multiple cell types,
though dendritic cells are the primary producer of IFNα. Type
1 interferons are produced ﬁrst by the TLR or RIG-I pathways,
and then fed into the JAK-STAT pathway when they are excreted
from the producing cell and bound to an IFN receptor on
the surface of the same or other cells (Pestka et al., 2004;
Hervas-Stubbs et al., 2011; Ivashkiv and Donlin, 2014). In
addition to type 1 IFN’s, there are also type 2 IFN’s known
as IFNγ. IFNγ is crucial to RSV clearance by the immune
system (Gonzalez et al., 2012). The RIG-I pathway feeds into
the TLR pathways to activate type 1 interferon production. RIGI activates MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein)
which is located in/on the mitochondria. MAV activates TRAF3,
which in turn activates TANK, which then activates IKKε leading
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
to IRF3 activation. IRF3 then acts as it does in the TLR pathway
(2014; Reikine et al., 2014; Zevini et al., 2017).
VIRAL REPLICATION AND NS PROTEIN
PRODUCTION
RSV has ten genes coding for 11 proteins, and in order, these
genes are Ns1, Ns2, N, P, M, SH, G, F, M2 (−1,−2), and L. In
order to undergo successful transcription, RSV requires its M21 protein, a transcription elongation factor, in addition to the N,
P, and L proteins. Other members of the Mononegavirales order,
such as its closest relatives metapneumovirus and parainﬂuenza,
only require the N, P and L proteins for this process. During RSV
transcription, the polymerase proceeds along with the transcript
from the ﬁrst start site, right before the Ns1 gene, in a sequential,
termination-re-initiation (stop-start) mechanism (Kuo et al.,
1997). RSV genes are under one transcriptional promotor
(Collins and Wertz, 1983) and can initiate transcription at either
a +1 or a +3 initiation site before the NS1 start site. The RdRp
(RNA dependent RNA polymerase) can initiate transcription
independently at both positions. Initiation at either the +1 or
the +3 site determines whether transcription or replication will
occur. Initiation at the +3 site yields a short leader transcript
(∼25nt) and then reinitiates at the gene start site (gs) immediately
preceding Ns1 to produce mRNA’s. Initiation at the +1 site
leads to full-length transcripts that are readily encapsidated by
N (Tremaglio et al., 2013; Noton et al., 2019).
Since the viral genes must be transcribed in order, the order
of genes in the genome is vital in the timing of infection.
Ns1 and Ns2 (non-structural proteins) are the ﬁrst genes to be
transcribed. These proteins, which are essential for permissive
in vivo infection, function to inhibit the type 1 interferon
(IFN) response, other elements of the immune system, and may
contribute to the high incidence of secondary bacterial infections
in RSV infections due to its interference with the immune
system (Teng and Collins, 1999; Jin et al., 2000; Bossert and
Conzelmann, 2002; Lo et al., 2005; Elliott et al., 2007; Ling et al.,
2009; Verhoeven et al., 2014; Sun and Lopez, 2017). Thus, it is
imperative that Ns1/Ns2 are made early during infection (Jin
et al., 2000; Collins et al., 2013). The non-structural genes of RSV
are unique to the virus, as they have low, if any homology, with
genes of other viruses in the family serving a similar function
(Swedan et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2012). This review will further
focus on the non-structural genes of RSV, the interactions of their
proteins, and their importance in the viral life cycle of RSV.
Ns1 VS. Ns2
Of RSV’s non-structural genes, Ns1 has been more studied more
in-depth, and thus more of its role in infection is known than that
of Ns2. In terms of immune suppression, Ns1 is the dominant
player, and Ns2 may be a minor one, though important still for
enhancing and supporting RSV pathogenesis. RSV’s Ns1 is 139
amino acids long and Ns2 is slightly smaller at 124 amino acids
(Atreya et al., 1998) (GenBank: AFM95347.1, AFM95348.1). Ns1
is the ﬁrst gene in the genome and follows a 44-nt leader region
thus making it the most abundant transcripts produced. NS1
is followed directly by Ns2 with a small intergenic region of
around 19nts spacing between the two open reading frames
(Atreya et al., 1998).
While the Ns1 protein is fairly stable after translation and
can be detected in pulse chase experiments for hours, the Ns2
protein disappears rapidly in the early infection stage and is
thought to have an intracellular half-life of 1hr. Both Ns proteins
have been observed in multimeric forms which are thought to
be linked by disulﬁde bridges, though the predominant form of
Ns1 is thought to be its monomeric form (Collins et al., 1996;
Evans et al., 1996; Chatterjee et al., 2017). Ns1 and Ns2 can form
homo- and heteromers. Ns1 traﬃcs to the nucleus, while Ns2 as
well as a Ns1-Ns2 complex traﬃc to the mitochondria. Most of
the Ns1 and Ns2 in an infected cell resides in the mitochondria
as a heteromer (Swedan et al., 2011). Furter study is needed to
explain why the majority of the Ns proteins reside here, though
it may be a way to sequester them as a means of regulation; as
Ns1 inhibits viral replication including in minigenome systems
(Atreya et al., 1998) and mitochondrial metabolic byproducts
and proteins play critical roles in the antiviral response (Koshiba,
2013; Jin et al., 2017; Mohanty et al., 2019). While being
sequestered in the mitochondria may appear counterintuitive,
the Ns1 protein is subject to post-translational modiﬁcation,
which may indicate an additional regulatory mechanism (Atreya
et al., 1998). This modiﬁcation occurs by proteolytic cleavage,
producing a 12.5K protein that is thought to be produced shortly
after the production of the normal-sized Ns1. It is unknown
what function the modiﬁcation has and may be a byproduct of
Ns1. As the intensity of the Ns1 band in pulse-chase experiments
decreased the 12.5 K protein appeared. While Ns1 is thought
to be relatively stable, the discrepancies in diﬀerent papers may
indicate that only certain forms of the protein are stable (Huang
et al., 1985; Collins et al., 1996). The Ns genes inhibit the type
1 interferon response as well, so this may allow for a pause
in viral replication until IFN production is inhibited and RSV
can replicate without being suppressed by the innate antiviral
response. STAT1 and IFNAR1 knockout mice have increased
RSV titer/load compared to wildtype mice through all recorded
time points (Hashimoto et al., 2005; Goritzka et al., 2014).
RSV has an unusual replication growth curve, with slower and
less productive replication and gene expression compared to
other viruses of the same genome type (Atreya et al., 1998).
The inhibition of replication by Ns1 may help to explain this
phenomenon, especially since it is the earliest and most abundant
viral protein.
RSV has considerable variation in its genome between strains,
and the amount of variation varies by the gene. Between the
RSVA and B strains, the G gene has the most sequence variation.
Ns1 and Ns2 have 22% nucleic acid diﬀerences between theses
strains, with 13 and 8%, respectively diﬀerences in amino acid
sequence. For comparison, the N gene which is thought to be very
conserved diﬀers by 14 and 4% for nucleotide and amino acid
sequence similarity, respectively (Sullender, 2000). Comparing
within the A strains from 2006 to 2019 against the prototypical
A2 strain, the NS1 gene is fairly well-conserved on the amino
acid level with about 97 or 100% identical amino acids to each
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
other (using protein alignments). These amino acid changes,
when they occur, do appear to occur within predicted MHCI
binding peptides. Comparing NS2 strains between 2006 to 2019,
the amino acid sequence is also very conserved with 98–100%
conservation. Of interest, comparing mid/late 2,000 strains to
earlier strains from the 1980s and some 1990 strains shows a
substitution of R to K at the 38th amino acid. Scanning this
protein with MHCI epitope binding prediction software (IEBD),
this site falls within a conserved amino acid sequence that may
bind to all the major MHCI within diﬀerent ethnicities (i.e.,
HLA-A-2 and HLA-A-68). Some 1990s strains also have another
change in another predicted MHCI epitope with a change from R
to D at the 8th amino acid position. Going back to the sequence
diﬀerences between A and B strains, most of the amino acid
changes fall within predicted MHCI binding epitopes suggesting
immune pressure between the A and B strains but not as much
within each strain inside the same decade of circulation (i.e., 1–3
epitope changes between 2016 A and B strains in three predicted
epitopes). These suggest a general lack of immune pressure on
this protein as usually only one predicted CD8 T cell epitope
changes but not necessary from 1 year to the following year.
Thus, the amount of sequence conservation across strains may
have relevance for possible drug therapies or vaccine targets, but
may also have relevance for host range determination. The Ns
genes may determine host range, as human RSV is capable of
infecting bovine cells and vice versa though they are not capable
of replicating in cows. When a virus containing the Ns genes of
a non-native host (i.e., transfer of BRSV ns genes into HRSV)
and infects non-native host cells, it replicates but is attenuated
compared to the wild type (Bossert and Conzelmann, 2002).
The Ns proteins have multiple recorded interactions with
cellular and other viral proteins. Ns1 has more recorded
interactions and an enormous scope of impact when compared
to Ns2. Ns1 is able to interact with Ns2, the RSV M protein,
and is capable of inhibiting multiple parts of the immune system
(Evans et al., 1996). Ns2, however, seems to be more limited in
its inhibitory capacity as most data on its interaction record it
only inhibiting the interferon response in infected cells. Together
the Ns genes are capable of interfering with both the adaptive
and innate antiviral immune response pathways (Atreya et al.,
1998).
MANIPULATION OF INNATE ANTIVIRAL
DEFENSE BY NS PROTEINS
The Ns proteins are known to bind to and inhibit various
molecules in the type 1 interferon response signal cascade
of either the RIG-I or TLR pathways. Ns1 and Ns2 form
degradosomes that home to the mitochondria, and are capable
of degrading multiple proteins in the type 1 interferon pathway
(Elliott et al., 2007; Swedan et al., 2009; Goswami et al.,
2013). Ns1 and Ns2 have a curious relationship with the
mitochondria as optimal degradosome function appears in
modiﬁed mitochondria that are shorter and more motile. The
modiﬁed mitochondria possess a greater surface area and thus
greater access to MAVS (Goswami et al., 2013).
The Ns degradosome is a heterogeneous large protein complex
300–750 kD in size. The degradosome targets TRAF’s (TNF
receptor-associated factors), TBK1 (TANK Binding Kinase 1),
RIG-I, IRF3/7, and STAT2. Through direct interaction with
RIG-1, Ns2 suppresses RLR (RIG-I-like Receptor) signaling as
well as prevents RIG-I from interacting with MAVS to prevent
downstream signaling. While the exact composition of the
degradosome is unknown, Ns1 acts as a functional E3 ligase and
to facilitate proteasomal degradation of target proteins (Sun and
Lopez, 2017). The helix α3 structure in the Ns1 protein, which
is a highly conserved sequence across RSV strains, is thought
to be of critical importance for the function of the protein. The
helix α3 structure is important for the stability of the protein,
IFN inhibition, as well as for the suppression of DC maturation
(Chatterjee et al., 2017).
RIG AND TLR INTERACTIONS WITH NS
PROTEINS
The RIG-I and TLR pathways both function to induce the
production of interferons after contact with a PAMP (pathogenassociated molecular pattern), and feed into one another’s
pathways due to overlapping functions. An eﬀect on one often,
but not always, has an eﬀect on the other. As stated previously,
Ns1 is able to enter the mitochondria of cells. After entry, the
protein can bind to and inhibits MAVS (Boyapalle et al., 2012)
which serves as the intermediary protein downstream of RIG-I.
The Ns genes also inhibit the proteins IRF-7, and IRF-3, which are
involved in both the RIG-I and the TLR pathways (Lo et al., 2005;
Elliott et al., 2007; Ling et al., 2009). RIG-I is essential for the IFN
induction during RSV infection, similar to other RNA viruses
such as inﬂuenza (Killip et al., 2015; Mäkelä et al., 2015; Wu
et al., 2015). In contrast, Ns2 binds RIG-I directly and inhibits
its functions (Lo et al., 2005; Elliott et al., 2007; Ling et al., 2009).
The type of cell that is infected by RSV seems to have an
eﬀect on which antiviral pathway is most helpful in limiting
viral replication. The primary pathway used by dendritic cells
to target and respond to an RSV infection is the TLR pathway,
whereas lung epithelial cells use more of the RIG-I pathway
as the primary form of response and clearance (Swedan et al.,
2009). RSV infection is more prevalent in lung epithelial cells
than in dendritic cells (Olszewska-Pazdrak et al., 1998; Zhang
et al., 2002; Lukens et al., 2009; Rivera-Toledo and Gomez, 2012),
and RSV’s Ns proteins can target multiple stages of the TLR and
RIG-I pathways. Ns1 can target TRAF3, and IKKε and leads to
a reduction in the amounts of these proteins. TRAF3 intersects
both the TLR and RIG-I pathways, and its inhibition allows RSV
to evade the signaling caused by its production of viral RNA and
its F protein (Swedan et al., 2009). Ns2 inhibits the activation
of IRF3 early in infection as well as the activation of IFN via
RIG-I. Ns2 interacts with RIG-I using the N-terminal 229aa
of RIG-I, preventing RIG-I-MAVS interaction and preventing
downstream activation of IRF3. Ns2 is able to both antagonize
IFN induction and signaling, as well as inhibiting apoptosis,
promoting continued viral replication (Bitko et al., 2007). Ns2 is
able to bind to the N-terminal CARD (Caspase activation and
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
recruitment domain) of RIG-I. This interaction inhibits RIG-IMAVS interaction and prevents the downstream induction of the
IFN gene in this pathway. Since RIG-I and IRF3, both of which
are inhibited by Ns2, are important for the induction of type
III interferons that this may be the mechanism by which RSV
suppresses type III IFN’s (Swedan et al., 2011; Barik, 2013). IFN-λ
is a type III interferon which is associated with mucosal surfaces
(Zanoni et al., 2017). In Ns deletion studies IFN-λ showed
increased accumulation with the eﬀect being most pronounced
with deletion of both Ns1 and Ns2, though Ns1 deletion alone
showed a statistically signiﬁcant increase (Spann et al., 2004). As
IFN-λ may prove to be the predominant IFN produced in RSV
infection this is an exciting area of research worthy of more study
(Okabayashi et al., 2011). According to Spann et al., deletion of
Ns1 and Ns2 resulted in a 300-fold increase in the expression
of IFN-α compared to mock-treated cells at 18hrs; the increase
in expression decreased over time. Deletion of just Ns1 led to
an 18-fold increase, with Ns2 deletion not showing a signiﬁcant
increase. Deletion of the Ns proteins also had an eﬀect on IFNβ showing an increase of 40,000 fold for the double deletion at
18hrs (Spann et al., 2004). Ns2 is capable of weakly reducing the
amount of TRAF3 while causing a slight increase in IKKε. Unlike
Ns1, Ns2 is able to directly reduce STAT2 (Swedan et al., 2011;
Goswami et al., 2013). The inhibition of STAT2 means that RSV
has ways in which to inhibit not only the induction of the primary
wave of type 1 interferon response but also the secondary (Lo
et al., 2005; Elliott et al., 2007; Ling et al., 2009).
STAT PATHWAYS
The STAT pathway portion of the interferon system induces
a way to respond to secreted interferons in an autocrine or
paracrine fashion to induce a secondary wave of interferons.
Not only is Ns1 able to inhibit the primary induction of IFN
production, but it can degrade STAT2 through interactions with
Ns2 and Elongin-Cullin E3 Ligase. It is also able to inhibit the
secondary induction of IFN production via the IFN receptor
signaling pathway (Lo et al., 2005; Elliott et al., 2007; Ling
et al., 2009). To achieve this, Ns1 has multiple interactions
involving the IFN receptor signaling pathway including but
not limited to, upregulating SOCS1 and SOCS3 (suppressor
of cytokine signaling), triggering STAT2 degradation, targeting
the interferon-alpha receptor and inhibiting its response,
and downregulating the JAK-STAT signaling pathway through
STAT2 degradation (Xu et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2015; Zhang
et al., 2016). Multiple members of the paramyxovirus family, of
which RSV used to be classiﬁed under until 2016, degrade STAT2
as a mechanism for inhibiting IFN1 production in infected
cells. Mumps and Simian Virus 5 degrade STAT1, and human
parainﬂuenza type 2 degrades STAT2. Both these mechanisms
function to hamper IFN-α/β signal transduction (Elliott et al.,
2007). Both Ns1 and Ns2 have a C-terminal tetrapeptide known
as DLNP, which is involved in IFN suppressive functions like
binding to MPA1B (microtubule-associated protein 1B) which
is essential for the STAT2 reduction by Ns2 later on in infection
(Swedan et al., 2011).
ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
MANIPULATIONS
The Ns1 protein of RSV also plays a role in altering CD4+
(helper T cells) and CD8+ (cytotoxic T cell) cells. Ns1
suppresses the CD103+ CD8+ T cell (tissue-resident memory
T cells) response, promote a Th2 (T helper cell) response,
and suppress the Th17 response (Munir et al., 2011). Ns1 also
increases the percentage of CD4+ T cells positive for IL-4
(interleukin) and enhances their proliferation by antagonizing
the anti-proliferative eﬀect of interferon type 1 (IFN-I). Munir
et al. show that Ns1 depresses the concentration of IFNγ
in DC-T cell co-cultures. The authors state that their data
suggests that the Ns1 protein contributes to skewing of the
Th1/Th2 balance toward Th2 during the priming of naive
T cells or stimulation of memory T cells (Munir et al.,
2011).
Deletion of the Ns1 protein results in an increase in dendritic
cells (DC) maturation (Munir et al., 2008, 2011). While RSV
induces the maturation of DC, these RSV-matured DC have
an impaired ability to activate CD4+ T lymphocytes, possibly
due to Ns1 and Ns2 mediated suppression of gene functions
or mitochondrial mediators known for cell to cell signaling.
Maturation can also be aﬀected when Ns2 is also deleted,
though Ns2 deletion alone does not yield a signiﬁcant increase
in DC maturation. Munir et al. measured DC maturation
through cell surface expression and production of chemokines
and cytokines. In the absence of RSV’s Ns genes, the markers
CD83 and CD38 were upregulated (Munir et al., 2008). It is
thought that CD83 suppression by the Ns genes may explain the
impaired activation of T-cells due to a reduction in costimulatory
function and may lead to an impaired expansion of antigenspeciﬁc CD8+ cells. Suppression of CD38 reduces the survival
of mature DC and results in a shift in T cell diﬀerentiation
from favoring Th1 cells. The suppression of DC surface markers
depends on the antagonism of the type 1 interferon response,
as seen through the use of an IFNAR2-blocking monoclonal
antibody (Munir et al., 2008). This antibody blocks the increase
in surface markers and other eﬀects of Ns gene deletion,
and in the presence of the IFNAR2 blockade, there is also
reduced RSV-induced maturation, indicating that IFN’s can
contribute to DC maturation despite the presence of the Ns genes
(Munir et al., 2008).
NS EFFECT ON CELL CYCLE AND VIRAL
REPLICATION
The Ns genes of RSV are crucial for the replication and
proliferation of the virus in many ways. Prior studies suggest that
the Ns genes are required for a permissive infection in vivo but
are not required for a permissive infection in vitro, though these
viruses grow more slowly (Teng and Collins, 1999; Jin et al., 2000;
Bossert and Conzelmann, 2002). However, some researchers have
found that while Ns1 deletion strongly attenuates the in vivo
infection, the gene is not strictly required for permissive infection
(Teng et al., 2000).
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
Additionally, Ns1 and Ns2 are capable of inhibiting premature
apoptosis, which protects the virus’s cellular resources allowing
it to continue replicating. Several RSV proteins, including the
Ns proteins, have been shown to block or delay apoptotic death
of infected cells (Bitko et al., 2007). The mechanism behind
this may be IFN independent as observed in A549 and Vero
cell, perhaps through inducing the expression of anti-apoptotic
factors like AKT (Barik, 2013; Sun and Lopez, 2017). Both Ns1
and Ns2 induce the production of anti-apoptotic molecules early
in infection such as NF-κB, AKT, PDK, and GSK. Other viruses
such as PIV5 (which is related to RSV) also use some of their
proteins to inhibit apoptosis, indicating that this behavior may
be typical in RNA viral IFN-antagonists (Barik, 2013). Ns1 is
involved in modulating the cell cycle of the infected cell and
is thought to be a key player during the G1-phase arrest. RSV
infected cells, in general, seem to have a G0/G1-phase preference
(Barik, 2013).
CONCLUSION
The Ns genes serve an essential purpose in the lifecycle of
RSV and have far-reaching implications for symptomology and
pathology of the virus. They are capable of aﬀecting almost
every stage of the immune response and have multiple ways of
eﬀecting the same systems. From inhibiting both the primary
and secondary waves of interferon production via TLR, RIGI, and STAT pathways to altering immune cell maturation
and diﬀerentiation, the Ns proteins prove crucial in blocking
the immune response and protecting RSV from the antiviral
response. Some of their features and functions outlined in this
review are summarized in Figure 2.
Despite their crucial function of immune suppression, they
are still considered to be unessential accessory proteins, which
can be deleted in vitro with little eﬀect of viral replication as
a whole. In-vivo they may serve as possible vaccine deletion
FIGURE 2 | The many functions of Ns1 and Ns2. (A) Ns2 and Ns1-Ns2 complex home to the mitochondria where the majority of these proteins reside. The Ns
formed degradosome also trafﬁcs to the mitochondria while Ns1 homes to the nucleus. (B) Ns1 inhibits viral replication. (C) Ns1, Ns2, and degradosome interactions
with the RIG-I and TLR pathway showing which proteins and at what steps they inhibit IFN induction and signaling. (D) Ns1 and Ns2 upregulate anti-apoptotic
proteins and prevent apoptosis. (E) Ns1 suppresses Trm and Th17 differentiation while promoting Th2 cell differentiation and the percentage of T cells expressing Il-4.
Both Ns1 and Ns2 inhibit DC maturation.
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 225
Thornhill and Verhoeven
RSV NS Proteins Functions
mutants or treatment targets as their deletion serves to attenuate
the virus. They may also serve a purpose in suppressing
anti-inﬂammatory treatments as Ns1 suppresses glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) nuclear translocation and may block it completely
(Xie et al., 2017). Ns1 interacts with IPO13 (importin) and may
compete with GR for IPO13 binding, providing a mechanism
of suppression or blockage. The lack of GR translocation may
explain why RSV infection seems to lead to glucocorticoid
insensitivity (Xie et al., 2017).
RSV infection in infants and the elderly are known to cause
signiﬁcant inﬂammation in the lungs, especially in the lower
respiratory tract. Experiments in aged mice and cotton rats
show that aged animals have a delayed viral clearance with
reduced IFN-γ levels, as also observed in infants (Lee et al., 2005;
Boukhvalova et al., 2007; Fulton and Varga, 2009; Verhoeven,
2019). IFN-γ is a signiﬁcant factor in RSV clearance and is
secreted by CD8+ and CD4+ T cells (Gonzalez et al., 2012).
Moreover, Ns1 can alter CD8+ and CD4+ T cells and reduces
the amount of IFN-γ produced by dendritic cells (Munir et al.,
2011). Other sources of inﬂammation in RSV infection include
the upregulation of TNF-α production through TLR activation
and enhanced recruitment of neutrophils (Abu-Harb et al., 1999;
McNamara et al., 2005; Rudd et al., 2005; Dou et al., 2013). While
neutrophils are readily detected in infected airways CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells needed to clear infection are often only detected
at low levels (Rosenberg and Domachowske, 2012). Neutrophils
recruitment by Il-8 is increased during RSV infection and can
increase inﬂammation further damaging to the lung epithelia
(Abu-Harb et al., 1999; McNamara et al., 2005). Neutrophils can
be infected by RSV, and there is some evidence that RSV infection
of neutrophils may inhibit their phagocytic ability (O’Donnell
et al., 1998; Rohwedder et al., 1998; Torres et al., 2010; Halfhide
et al., 2011; Verhoeven et al., 2014). It is unknown how this may
be occurring, but it would not be surprising if the NS genes
were involved in some way due to their ability to aﬀect other
immune cells.
The Ns proteins traﬃc to the mitochondria and are
sequestered there but is unknown what they are doing while
there. Perhaps they are further tweaking gene regulation. How
and why the Ns genes speciﬁcally alter the expression and ratios
of T helper and other immune cells also needs to be determined.
While Ns1 inhibits replication in minigenome systems, it has not
been shown to inhibit replication in other systems. Since Ns1
traﬃcs to the nucleus, it may be inhibiting cellular transcription
or replication there. The M and Ns1 proteins are closely
associated, and M traﬃcs to the nucleus where it inhibits cellar
transcription, but these interactions in the nucleus need further
study. More research needs to be done on the mechanisms of
action of the Ns genes as their inhibitory eﬀects on the immune
system contribute to the severe symptomology associated with
RSV infection. The timing of Ns function during in infection
is not well-understood, and there is evidence that both genes
may be modiﬁed and are inherently unstable with some reports
showing loss of protein after 30 min (Huang et al., 1985; Collins
et al., 1996; Evans et al., 1996). There is even some evidence
that Ns2 maybe secreted which would allow for easier treatment
targeting, or as an addition to a subunit vaccine strategy to
limit overstimulation by the immune system (Collins et al.,
1996).
Currently there are vaccine candidates under investigation
that have Ns2 deletions, deletion of the Ns genes are attenuating
with deletion on Ns1 having a greater eﬀect than deletion of
Ns2 and deletion of both is considered to be over attenuating.
While promising both vaccine candidates combine other viral
alterations with the Ns2 deletion indicating that Ns2 deletion
alone may be under attenuating. A viable vaccine candidate for
RSV that involves the deletion or modiﬁcation of the Ns genes
must be careful to strike the balance between over and under
attenuation of the virus, which may be diﬃcult given the lack of
knowledge of the Ns genes (Jin et al., 2000; Bitko et al., 2007;
Munir et al., 2008; Luongo et al., 2013; Karron et al., 2019).
Through further study of the Ns genes and their activity in cells,
we can better understand RSV and ﬁnd novel therapies and
vaccine strategies to better combat RSV in the future, especially
given how common this virus is.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
DV contributed to the writing and editing of the manuscript. ET
wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
Funding for DV given from Iowa State University Startup funds.
