ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 11 October 2019
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2019.00354
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
1
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Edited by:
Timothy J. Johnson,
University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
United States
Reviewed by:
Dilip Kumar Garikipati,
Cleveland Clinic, United States
Hyeun Bum Kim,
Dankook University, South Korea
*Correspondence:
Aaron C. Ericsson
ericssona@missouri.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Comparative and Clinical Medicine,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Veterinary Science
Received: 04 February 2019
Accepted: 26 September 2019
Published: 11 October 2019
Citation:
Vientós-Plotts AI, Ericsson AC,
Rindt H and Reinero CR (2019)
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine
Bacterial Pneumonia: Standard
Culture vs. Microbiome Sequencing.
Front. Vet. Sci. 6:354.
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2019.00354
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine
Bacterial Pneumonia: Standard
Culture vs. Microbiome Sequencing
Aida I. Vientós-Plotts 1,2,3, Aaron C. Ericsson 1,4,5*, Hansjorg Rindt 1,3 and Carol R. Reinero 1,2,3
1 College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States, 2 Department of Veterinary Medicine
and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States, 3 Comparative Internal
Medicine Laboratory, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States, 4 University of Missouri Metagenomics Center,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States, 5 Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States
It is unknown how the respiratory microbiome inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by bacterial
pneumonia in dogs, as culture of lung samples and not microbial sequencing guides
clinical practice. While accurate identiﬁcation of pathogens are essential for treatment,
not all bacteria are cultivable and the impact of respiratory dysbiosis on development of
pneumonia is unclear. The study purposes were to (1) characterize the lung microbiome
in canine bacterial pneumonia and compare deviations in dominant microbial populations
with historical healthy controls, (2) compare bacteria identiﬁed by culture vs. 16S
rDNA sequencing from bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid (BALF) culture-, and (3) evaluate
similarities in lung and oropharyngeal (OP) microbial communities in community-acquired
and secondary bacterial pneumonia. Twenty BALF samples from 15 client-owned
dogs diagnosed with bacterial pneumonia were enrolled. From a subset of dogs,
OP swabs were collected. Extracted DNA underwent PCR of the 16S rRNA gene.
Relative abundance of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were determined. The relative
abundance of bacterial community members found in health was decreased in dogs
with pneumonia. Taxa identiﬁed via culture were not always the dominant phylotype
identiﬁed with sequencing. Dogs with community-acquired pneumonia were more likely
to have overgrowth of a single organism suggesting loss of dominant species associated
with health. Dogs with secondary bacterial pneumonia had a greater regional continuity
between the upper and lower airways. Collectively, these data suggest that dysbiosis
occurs in canine bacterial pneumonia, and culture-independent techniques may provide
greater depth of understanding of the changes in bacterial community composition that
occur in disease.
Keywords: microbiota, pneumonia, respiratory, dog, bronchoalveolar lavage, culture, sequencing, dysbiosis
INTRODUCTION
Canine bacterial pneumonia is a common respiratory disorder, occurring as primary disease
process, or secondary to aspiration, viral infections (1, 2), immunodeﬁciency, or a nosocomial event
(3). In both humans and companion animals, bacterial pneumonia can be life-threatening making
prompt diagnosis and targeted treatment essential. Diagnostic approaches to identify the causative
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
agents have traditionally relied on ex vivo culture from
carefully collected airway lavage [e.g., bronchoalveolar lavage
ﬂuid (BALF)]. This method is predicated on the belief that
the deep airways are largely free of bacteria and any growth
on selective media represents aberrant colonization. The recent
development of culture-independent molecular techniques has
revealed that in humans (4), cats (5), dogs (6), sheep (7), and
likely other host species, the healthy lungs harbor low biomass
microbial populations seeded via direct extension from upper
airway communities, repeated microaspiration, and inhalation of
bacteria in air (8). Moreover, these culture-independent methods
have reinforced that a lack of cultivable organisms does not
necessarily indicate a sterile environment (9). Collectively, such
ﬁndings suggest that sequencing methods might have clinical
utility in the identiﬁcation of microbes associated with bacterial
pneumonia. Toward that end, the current study compared the
results of traditional culture-based methods and a targeted
sequencing approach applied to 20 BALF samples collected from
15 dogs aﬀected with bacterial pneumonia in a referral veterinary
hospital setting.
Canine
bacterial
pneumonia
is
categorized
as
either
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) or secondary bacterial
pneumonia (SBP) based on the etiology, clinical presentation,
and patient history. As the name implies, CAP is typiﬁed by
known contagious pathogens, such as Bordetella bronchiseptica
and Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus and is often
seen in dogs with a history of acute onset clinical signs
following exposure to reservoirs of infectious agents, such as
shelters, boarding facilities, and dog parks (10, 11). Secondary
bacterial pneumonia, on the other hand, occurs as a sequela
to a predisposing anatomic or physiological condition, such as
megaesophagus, laryngeal paralysis, or ciliary dyskinesia (12),
and the microbes recovered in a diagnostic sample are often
not primary contagious pathogens, per se. Rather, dysfunction
of the upper respiratory tract or gastrointestinal tract allows
or facilitates increased translocation of material to the lower
airways and/or prevents eﬀective microbial clearance, leading
to the hypothesis that the lower and upper airway microbiota
would be more similar in cases of SBP relative to cases of
CAP. To address this question, oropharyngeal (OP) swabs were
collected from a subset of dogs alongside BALF samples and
the compositional similarity of OP and BALF microbiota was
evaluated in the context of clinical diagnoses and predisposing
anatomic factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental Design
The current study was performed prospectively at the University
of Missouri Veterinary Health Center (VHC), a referral and
primary care veterinary hospital located in Columbia, MO, USA.
All dogs contributing samples to the current study presented
to the VHC with clinical signs related to bacterial pneumonia
Abbreviations: BALF, bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid; CAP, community-acquired
pneumonia; OUT, operational taxonomic unit; PCoA, principal coordinate
analysis; RA, relative abundance; SBP, secondary bacterial pneumonia.
between August 2016 and December 2017. Bronchoscopic
examination and diagnostic collection of BALF were performed
as part of their standard care. Peripheral blood was also collected
at presentation for hematologic and serum chemistry analyses.
Dogs were then diagnosed with bacterial pneumonia based on
clinical signs associated with septic suppurative inﬂammation
or a positive aerobic or anaerobic culture result of BALF, and
categorized by type of pneumonia based on the history, clinical
signs and other diagnostic ﬁndings. Dogs were of various breeds
and ages; a table showing the range of patient demographics is
provided in Table 2.
Sample Collection
Anesthetic protocols were performed at the discretion of a board
certiﬁed veterinary anesthesiologist. Samples were collected as
previously described (5). Brieﬂy, after induction for anesthesia,
while avoiding the rest of the oral cavity, a sterile swab was
used to vigorously rub the caudodorsal aspect of the oropharynx,
from a subset of patients (see Table 1). The swab was added
to 800 µL lysis buﬀer adapted from Yu and Morrison (13).
Dogs were initially intubated using sterile endotracheal tubes.
Control samples were obtained by running a 10 ml aliquot of
sterile saline through the endoscope channel before its use.
Immediately prior to the bronchoscopy, the endotracheal tube
was replaced with a sterile red rubber catheter to provide
oxygen and the endoscope was passed directly through the
larynx into the tracheobronchial tree. BALF collection was
performed by instilling one or two 20 mL aliquots of sterile saline
through the channel of a sterile bronchoscope when wedged
in an airway. All dogs provided one BALF sample with the
following exceptions: dog I provided one sample on 1/12/2017
(I1) and two samples from the left and right lung lobes in on
11/2016 (I2 and I3, respectively), dog M provided samples on
11/4 and 12/20 of 2016 (M1 and M2), and dog G provided
samples on 11/11, 12/1, and 12/21 of 2016 (G1, G2, and G3,
respectively). Following collection of BALF, samples were split
to provide a minimum of 1 mL of material to the University of
Missouri Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory for culture
on Blood agar and MacConkey agar plates for aerobic cultures,
and chocolate agar plates for anaerobic cultures. All aerobic
samples were incubated at 35◦C, and anaerobic cultures were
incubated at 35◦C with 95% air and 5% CO2 for 24–36 h. The
laboratory does not culture Mycoplasma spp. in large part due to
challenging growth requirements. Bacterial isolates were Gramstained and identiﬁed with conventional biochemical reactions
(14), the Automated Sensititre AP-80 or AP 90 for aerobic
bacteria or the MALDI-TOF identiﬁcation system (Matrix
Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time of Flight: Bruker
Daltonics, Inc. 40 Manning Road, Manning Park, Billerica,
MA 01821). Aerobic susceptibility testing was performed with
the Sensititre Micro-Broth (Thermoﬁsher Scientiﬁc 12076 Santa
Fe Drive, Lenexa, KS 66215) dilution minimal inhibitory
concentration system. Up to 30 mL of the remaining BALF
material was promptly centrifuged, and the resulting pellet
was frozen and maintained at −80◦C until DNA extraction
was performed.
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
2
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
TABLE 1 | Comparison of culture and targeted sequencing results for lower airways (BALF) and relative abundance of predominant OTU in BALF found in upper airways.
BALF
OP
Dog
Culture results
Closest 16S rRNA match
RA (%)
16S rRNA > 10% RA
RA (%)
RA (%)
A*
Streptococcus canis
Streptococcus canis
99.30
Streptococcus spp.
99.30
10.88
B*
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Not detected
Mycoplasma canis PG14
53.30
7.67
Mycoplasma sp. VJC358
44.60
1.72
C*
Enterococcus faecalis
Not detected
Mycoplasma sp.
99.60
7.87
Enterococcus hirae
Not detected
Lactobacillus sp.
Lactobacillus sp.
<0.01
Corynebacterium sp.
Corynebacterium sp.
<0.01
Pseudomonas sp.
Pseudomonas sp.
<0.01
D
Streptococcus canis
Streptococcus sp.
96.40
Streptococcus sp.
96.40
E
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Not detected
Ureaplasma sp.
25.90
Mycoplasma sp.
15.40
Pseudomonas sp.
13.30
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
11.40
Brevundimonas vesicula
Brevundimonas sp.
6.80
Bradyrhizobium sp. T92
10.50
F
Staphylococcus schleiferi
Staphylococcus sp.
0.20
Acinetobacter sp.
37.90
Rhizobium sp.
20.60
Brevundimonas sp.
11.20
Bacillus sp.
Not detected
Bradyrhizobium sp. T92
10.40
G1*
Acinetobacter junii
Acinetobacter sp.
24.30
Acinetobacter sp.
24.49
3.90
Acinetobacter johnsonii
Lactobacillus salivarius
Lactobacillus salivarius
1.30
Family Beijerinckiaceae
26.40
0.001
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Klebsiella sp. Z1
<0.01
G2*
Escherichia coli
Esherichia-Shigella
2.80
Bacteroides sp.
17.23
10.96
Pseudomonas putida
13.7
0.03
G3*
Streptococcus canis
Streptococcus canis
14.30
Prevotella sp. (COT 298)
31.10
15.21
Streptococcus canis
14.30
6.68
Escherichia coli
Escherichia-Shigella
10.80
Escherichia-Shigella
10.80
15.33
H
Escherichia coli
Escherichia-Shigella
1.70
Acinetobacter sp.
25.90
Agrobacterium sp. Emb7
13.80
I1*
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius E140
74.50
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius E140
74.50
1.52
Pseudomonas putida
Pseudomonas sp.
1.50
I2 (L)
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
6.20
Acinetobacter sp.
31.30
Rhizobium sp.
18.60
I3 (R)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
92.00
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
92.00
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
5.30
J
Bacteroides fragilis (anaer.)
Bacteroides sp.
8.40
Pseudomonas sp.
20.30
Brevundimonas sp.
12.70
Bradyrhizobium sp. T92
12.50
Acinetobacter sp.
10.30
K
No growth
Pseudomonas putida
71.90
L
Pseudomonas alcaligenes
Pseudomonas sp.
8.50
Pseudomonas putida
30.20
Alloprevotella sp.
11.90
M1*
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Klebsiella sp. Z1
34.80
Klebsiella sp. Z1
34.80
51.89
Acinetobacter sp.
13.10
0.32
M2*
Haemophilus parainﬂuenza
Haemophilus sp. (COT 326)
6.40
Prevotella sp. (COT 298)
25.88
32.13
Bacteroides sp.
15.77
12.48
N*
Achromobacter sp.
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
3.80
Bradyrhizobium sp. T92
57.10
1.08
Ochrobactrum anthropi
Not detected
Chryseobacterium sp.
Chryseobacterium sp.
2.30
O*
No growth
Pasteurella sp.
50.20
0.84
Pantoea sp.
17.00
0.02
Asterisks indicate dogs providing paired BALF samples and OP swabs.
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
3
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
TABLE 2 | Patient demographics related to samples included in the current analysis.
Dog
Breed
Sex
Age
Wt. (kg)
Type of pneumonia
A*
Siberian husky
MC
8 years
24.5
CAP
B*
Great Dane
F
6 months
25
CAP
C*
Great Dane
F
6 months
32.4
CAP
D
Giant Schnauzer
FS
1 year
25
CAP
E
Bulldog
MC
4 months
8
CAP
F
Great Dane
MC
5 years
71
CAP
G*
Mixed
MC
1 year
13.5
SBP; megaesophagus; AP
H*
Mastiff
FS
10 months
30
SBP; upper airway obstruction; AP
I*
Mixed
MC
8 years
8.8
SBP; chronic lower airway disease
J
Chesapeake Bay retriever
FS
4 years
31.7
SBP; chronic lower airway disease
K
Mixed
FS
1 year
10.7
SBP; pyothorax
L
Maltese
MC
6 years
9.8
SBP: tracheal FB; AP
M*
Welsh corgi
MC
2 years
8.6
SBP; tongue myopathy; AP
N*
Mixed
FS
10 years
13
SBP; UES achalasia; AP
O*
Border collie
MC
12 years
22
SBP; laryngeal paralysis; AP
MC, male castrated; FS, female spayed; CAP, community acquired pneumonia; SBP, secondary bacterial pneumonia; AP, aspiration pneumonia; FB, foreign body; UES, upper esophageal
sphincter; Letters designated with *, paired OP and BALF samples.
DNA Extraction
To maximize yields, DNA was ﬁrst extracted using a manual
nucleic acid precipitation, followed by resuspension of DNA in
buﬀer and puriﬁcation using DNeasy kits (Qiagen) according
to manufacturer’s instructions with minor modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy,
BALF was ﬁrst centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 10 min at room
temperature, followed by removal of the supernatant and
resuspension in 800 µL lysis buﬀer as adapted from Yu and
Morrison (13). Samples were then incubated at 70◦C for 20 min
with periodic mixing and centrifuged as before. Next, 10 mM
ammonium acetate (200 µL) was added to the supernatant and
samples were incubated on ice for 5 min, before centrifugation
at 5,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature. Up to 750 µL of
the supernatant was then mixed with an equal volume of chilled
isopropanol and incubated on ice for 30 min. Samples were then
centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4◦C. Precipitated nucleic
acids were then washed with 70% ethanol, resuspended in 150
µL Tris-EDTA (10 mM Tris and 1 mM EDTA), and processed
according to the DNeasy kit’s manufacturer’s instructions, with
the following modiﬁcation. Instead of eluting in the AE buﬀer
provided with the kits, DNA was eluted in the comparable,
but EDTA-free, EB buﬀer (Qiagen). Yields were determined via
ﬂuorometry (Qubit 2.0) using Qubit dsDNA BR assays (Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Samples were stored at −20◦C until
library preparation was performed.
16S rRNA Library Preparation and
Sequencing
Library construction and sequencing were performed at the
University of Missouri DNA Core facility, as previously
described (6). Brieﬂy, 16S rRNA amplicons were generated via
ampliﬁcation of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using
single-indexed universal primers (U515F/806R) (15, 16) ﬂanked
by Illumina standard adapter sequences. Following ampliﬁcation,
products were pooled for sequencing using the Illumina MiSeq
platform and V2 chemistry with 2 × 250 bp paired-end reads.
Informatics
Assembly, annotation, and binning of DNA sequences were
performed at the University of Missouri Informatics Research
Core facility. Contiguous DNA sequences were assembled using
FLASH software (17) and removed if found to be short after
trimming for a base quality <31. Qiime v1.9.1 software (18)
was used to perform de novo and reference-based chimera
detection and removal, and remaining contiguous sequences
were assigned to operational taxonomic units (OTUs) via de novo
OTU clustering and a criterion of 97% nucleotide identity.
Taxonomy was determined for selected OTUs using BLAST
against the SILVA database (19, 20). Principal coordinate analyses
(PCoA) were performed using ¼ root-transformed OTU relative
abundance data in PAST 3.17 (21). Metrics of richness and αdiversity were determined based on a rareﬁed dataset subsampled
to a uniform read count of 2,289 reads per sample using
beta_diversity_through_plots.py, available at http://qiime.org/
scripts/beta_diversity_through_plots.html.
Statistical Analysis
Distribution of read counts in experimental and control samples
was ﬁrst tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk method, and
diﬀerences in read count were then determined using a MannWhitney rank sum test due to non-normality, implemented
in SigmaPlot 13.0. Diﬀerences in β-diversity between BALF
and OP swab communities were determined using one-way
permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA),
implemented in Past 3.18 (21). To evaluate the similarity between
OP and BALF bacterial communities in the context of SBP vs.
CAP, time-matched OP and BALF samples were collected from
a subset of patients (designated with a ∗in Table 2) and the
intra-subject similarities between the OP and BALF communities
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
4
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
in patients with SBP and CAP were visualized and tested for
signiﬁcance (between disease type) via principal coordinate
analysis (PCoA) and one-way PERMANOVA, respectively. In
both analyses (i.e., PCoA and PERMANOVA), comparisons were
performed using both unweighted (i.e., Jaccard) and weighted
(i.e., Bray-Curtis) metrics. Brieﬂy, the Jaccard similarity is based
on the agreement between two samples with regard to the
proportion of shared taxa while the Bray-Curtis similarity also
accounts for agreement between two samples with regard to the
relative abundance of shared taxa. In all cases, signiﬁcance was
established as p < 0.05.
RESULTS
Twenty BALF samples were collected from 15 diﬀerent dogs
that met the enrollment criteria, i.e., a diagnosis of bacterial
pneumonia based on clinical signs and associated with BALF
septic suppurative inﬂammation or a positive culture result.
Eighteen of those 20 samples had positive bacterial cultures, from
which ten of 18 (56%) yielded one bacterial isolate, and eight of
18 (44%) yielded between two and ﬁve isolates.
Sequencing of 16S rRNA amplicon libraries generated from
BALF and control ﬂuid ﬂushed through the bronchoscopes
resulted in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p = 0.004) mean (± SEM) read
counts of 31,524 (± 7,663) and 4,728 (±1,576) reads per sample,
respectively. Additionally, seven BALF samples returning read
counts within two standard deviations of the mean read counts
generated from control samples showed generally good overall
agreement with culture results indicating that the data were still
meaningful. In contrast to the number of taxa identiﬁed based by
culture, the DNA detected in patient BALF samples represented
between 22 and 185 distinct operational taxonomic units (OTUs).
Thus, while traditional culture methods provide evidence of
live and cultivable bacteria in a sample and allow antimicrobial
susceptibility testing, 16S rRNA sequencing provides a more
comprehensive proﬁle of taxa present in a sample, whether
or not they are viable or cultivable. Additionally, mean ± SD
numbers of unique OTUs in BALF from dogs with CAP were
signiﬁcantly lower than those with SBP (26 ± 16 and 82 ± 30
OTUs, respectively; p = 0.0002).
In many cases, there was remarkable agreement between the
two methods, particularly in instances of a marked overgrowth
of a dominant taxon. Speciﬁcally, samples from dogs A and
D were both culture positive for Streptococcus canis alone, and
16S rRNA sequencing detected S. canis or Streptococcus sp. at
99.3 and 96.4% relative abundance (RA), respectively (Table 1).
Similarly, samples I1, I3, and M1 were culture positive for
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and Pseudomonas putida (I1),
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Achromobacter xylosoxidans (I3),
and Klebsiella pneumoniae (M1), with 16S sequencing detecting
S. pseudintermedius (74.5% RA) and P. putida (1.5% RA),
P. aeruginosa (92.0% RA) and A. xylosoxidans (5.3% RA), and
Klebsiella sp. Z1 (34.8% RA), respectively in the same samples.
In the majority of the remaining samples, taxa detected
via culture were also detected via sequencing but not as the
dominant phylotype. In samples I2, M2, G1, G2, G3, H, J, L,
F, and N, the dominant taxon determined by sequencing was
not cultured despite many of the detected species being readily
cultivable. In the aforementioned group of samples, cultured
bacteria represented from <0.01 to 24.3% of the DNA detected
via 16S rRNA sequencing (median 2.55% RA) or, in four of the
eighteen culture-positive cases (22.2%), were not detected at all
in the sequencing data (i.e., Bordetella bronchiseptica in samples
F and H, Enterococcus spp. in sample G, and Ochrobacterium
anthropi in sample N).
In cases of SBP, we hypothesized that the same factors
predisposing the dog to pneumonia would facilitate greater
translocation of upper airway microbes to the lung, relative to
what occurs in CAP. PCoA analysis revealed complete separation
of BALF and OP samples in dogs with CAP, and substantial
overlap between BALF and OP samples in dogs with SBP
(Figure 1). Accordingly, PERMANOVA detected a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between samples sites when based on the Jaccard
similarity (p = 0.0003; F = 3.21), but not Bray-Curtis (p = 0.15;
F = 1.32), indicating that the BALF and OP communities diﬀer
based on the presence or absence of certain taxa, but not with
regard to the relative abundance of shared taxa. Factoring in
individual variability, the intra-subject similarity between BALF
and OP communities was low in the three cases of CAP from
whom OP samples were collected (i.e., dogs A–C), regardless of
the similarity index used (Figure 2). In contrast, samples from
severely dysphagic dogs with conﬁrmed aspiration pneumonia
(e.g., dogs G and M) evinced a high degree of compositional
similarity between BALF and OP microbiota (Figure 3). It is
worth noting that, despite the apparent dissimilarity between
BALF and OP swabs in samples from dogs diagnosed with
CAP, the dominant taxa detected in the lower airways were
consistently detected in the matched upper airway samples, albeit
at a much lower relative abundance. Relative abundance (RA) of
the dominant taxon is another metric used to describe resident
bacterial communities in CAP and SBP. In 4/6 dogs with CAP,
and in 1/9 dogs with SBP, there was near eradication of the
microbial diversity in the lower airways, with predominant OTUs
found in RAs between 92.4 and 99.9%.
DISCUSSION
Methods complementary to traditional laboratory-based culture
of BALF in dogs with bacterial pneumonia, such as 16S rRNA
sequencing, are useful to understand the complex relationship
between pathogen and resident microbes. In this study, cultures
of BALF, used by clinicians to provide insight into underlying
pathogens, identiﬁed between zero and ﬁve bacterial species
in dogs with bacterial pneumonia. This was in stark contrast
to DNA sequencing that revealed rich microbial communities
ranging from 22 to 185 distinct OTUs. Dysbiosis was appreciated
by increases in the relative abundance of speciﬁc taxa, and
interlinked with this change, a decrease in the predominating
taxa found in healthy dog lungs (6). In the majority of
BALF samples, the cultured bacteria were present in the
sequencing data, despite variation between dogs as to whether
the dominant taxa determined by culture was identical to
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
5
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
FIGURE 1 | Principal component analysis of samples from bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid (BALF) and oropharyngeal swabs (OP), for a select number of cases of
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and secondary bacterial pneumonia (SBP); circles represent BALF, squares represent OP, SBP samples are in orange and
CAP samples are in purple.
FIGURE 2 | Intra-subject Jaccard (orange) and Bray-Curtis (blue) similarity between BALF and OP microbiota in cases of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and
secondary bacterial pneumonia (SBP); dotted lines indicate mean inter-subject similarity between all samples. Results of Student’s t-test shown on chart.
the dominant taxa based on sequencing. This phenomenon
has also been described in mechanically ventilated patients
in which 75% of organisms identiﬁed via culture were the
most abundant organisms identiﬁed via sequencing (22). An
advantage of molecular techniques is their enhanced ability
to provide insight as to how microbial communities change
in disease and allow comparisons in regional diﬀerences in
populations (i.e., upper vs. lower airways). Bacterial populations
present in the lungs during pneumonia depend on the
clinical scenario with diﬀerences between dogs with CAP
and SBP. In the former, there was generally a stark loss
of microbial diversity and replacement with a predominant
taxon. In the latter, with secondary risk factors for pneumonia,
such as laryngeal or esophageal dysfunction, lower airway
communities are likely heavily derived from those present in the
upper airways.
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
6
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
FIGURE 3 | Comparison of relative abundance in BALF and OP between community acquired and secondary bacterial pneumonia.
In a previous analysis of the lung microbiota of 16 healthy
dogs at the same institution (6), the most abundant taxa
were Acinetobacter johnsonii, Brevundimonas diminuta and
members for the family Pseudomonadaceae [mean (range) %
RA 19.81 (13.89–26.72), 22.48 (17.36–26.67), and 29.6 (18.57–
34.94), respectively]. The remainder of the taxa identiﬁed in
healthy dogs were present at a RA of 2.73% or less. This is in
stark contrast to the ﬁndings in this study, where Acinetobacter,
Brevundimonas, and members of the family Pseudomonadaceae
were present between 10 and 50% RA in 9/20 samples,
suggesting respiratory dysbiosis is a common component of
canine bacterial pneumonia.
In dogs with bacterial pneumonia, cultures of BALF would
seemingly support a single dominant or very small number
(<5) of lung pathogens; however, results of DNA sequencing
underscore the complexity of microbial communities in the lung,
even in the presence of infection. Mean numbers of distinct OTUs
identiﬁed in BALF of dogs with CAP (23) and SBP (82) were
similar to a prior study of the healthy canine lower respiratory
tract microbiome (6). Thus, richness (overall numbers of distinct
OTUs), while variable in pneumonia, was discordant with the
paucity of cultivable bacteria. Similarly, in a study evaluating
respiratory microbial communities of mechanically ventilated
patients with pneumonia, 12 out of 56 patients (21%) had
positive cultures. These patients had a signiﬁcant decrease in
microbial richness compared to culture negative subjects there
was a wide range in terms of richness (22). In patients that
developed pneumonia after receiving lung transplantation also
demonstrated a decrease in microbial richness (24). Most of the
microbes found via sequencing are not cultivable using standard
techniques, making it challenging to discern the larger picture of
microbial interactions within the lung. It is unclear how many
uncultured or as yet unidentiﬁed lung pathogens are responsible
for bacterial pneumonia, but study of the respiratory microbiome
will be critical moving forward.
The fact that, in 4 of 6 dogs with CAP, the predominant OTUs
represented between 92.4 and 99.9% of recovered DNA suggests
overgrowth of these organisms and reﬂect dramatic changes
from that reported in healthy dogs (6). It has been proposed
that disease is associated not just with pathogens gained, but
with resident species that are lost and that a greater risk of
repopulation with virulent organisms may be more likely with
disappearance of dominant species associated with health (25).
In dogs diagnosed with CAP, microbial diversity was abolished
relative to dogs with SBP.
With regard to those bacteria identiﬁed via standard culture
but not found in the sequencing data, Bordetella bronchiseptica
is a common and important canine respiratory pathogen
causing CAP that is also as a commensal organism in
healthy, asymptomatic dogs (23, 26). It is unclear as to why
B. bronchiseptica or closely related taxa were not detected in the
16S rRNA dataset. While the SILVA database used to annotate
the current data does contain multiple sequences speciﬁc to other
Bordetella spp., it is worth noting that the 16S rRNA sequence
of Achromobacter and Bordetella spp. share a high degree of
homology, and A. xylosoxidans was sequenced in both samples.
It is also possible that the Enterococcus and Bacillus species
identiﬁed via culture were a result of contamination, as these
organisms are considered to be ubiquitous. There are clinical
implications to identiﬁcation of organisms on culture that are
not present in the sample according to targeted sequencing. In
large part, results of standard culture techniques are relied upon
for information to guide treatment. This could potentially lead to
incorrect antibiotic selection.
Conversely, there are also limitations to the utility of
molecular approaches, the most apparent of which is the inability
to distinguish viable and dead bacteria using standard 16S rRNA
sequencing methods. The fact that many of the bacterial species
found in the sequencing data were also cultured indicates that at
least some of the bacteria present in the lungs are viable, and even
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
7
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
if DNA detected in BALF represents bacteria that have been killed
by the immune defenses of the lung (e.g., pulmonary alveolar
macrophages), it does not obviate an inﬂuence of those bacteria
on airway health. Without a viable isolate, it is also not possible
to perform antimicrobial susceptibility testing on taxa identiﬁed
via sequencing. Moreover, whether applying traditional culturebased or culture-independent molecular techniques, there is
an inherent risk of contamination and identiﬁcation of false
positives. However, while a single CFU can theoretically be
detected on culture, the competitive nature of 16S rRNA
sequencing (i.e., an overabundance of DNA amidst a limited
number of binding substrates on the sequencer ﬂow cell) renders
single CFUs as background noise and inadvertent contaminants
will not be detected as dominant taxa in the data. Lastly,
clinicians are limited by our still nascent appreciation of these
microbial communities. Until there is a better understanding
of the lung microbiota in the context of both health and
disease, it will be challenging to incorporate sequencing data into
clinical decisions.
The
development
of
targeted
sequencing
techniques
highlights limitations associated with standard culture. The
belief that the lower airways are sterile is still perpetuated in
textbooks; however, the notion of lung sterility has been refuted
by a number of studies following the ﬁrst culture-independent
report of the healthy human lung microbiome (27). Healthy
dogs and other species have diverse and dynamically changing
microbial communities inhabiting speciﬁc ecologic niches
in the lower airways in the absence of clinical evidence of
infection (6, 28–31). The composition of the lung microbiome
depends on microbial immigration into the airways, microbial
elimination and the relative reproduction rates of host microbial
communities determined by regional growth conditions (32).
Immigration is inﬂuenced by local mucosal extension from the
upper airways that lack a physical barrier separating them from
the lower airways, microaspiration, and inhalation of bacteria
from ambient air (8, 33). Protective reﬂexes, such as cough,
mucociliary function, and innate and adaptive mucosal immune
responses aﬀect elimination (8). Although bacterial pneumonia
has been regarded as resulting from invasion and growth of a
pathogen in the lungs, recent work suggests a primary driver of
disease is disruption of homeostasis of the complex microbial
ecosystem (34). The upper respiratory tract has been called
the gatekeeper to respiratory health, wherein “colonization
resistance” is provided by local bacterial communities preventing
establishment of mucosal infections capable of spreading to
the lower respiratory tract. Thus, while the airway microbiome
has the capacity to blunt growth of pathogenic species during
states of equilibrium, dysbiosis of upper airways in humans has
been linked to CAP (35), SBP (36), and ventilator associated
pneumonia (22). In the subset of dogs with paired OP and
BALF samples, 3 dogs had CAP, and 8 had SBP. The dogs with
CAP were more likely to have a single OTU predominate. In
contrast, dogs with SBP were more likely to have ≥2 OTUs. It is
interesting to note that in several cases (G3, M1, M2), one of the
OTUs found in BALF at a relative abundance of >10% was also
present in the OP at an even greater relative abundance. Taking
into consideration an underlying process disrupting homeostasis
in SBP, it was not surprising that dogs with SBP had more similar
microbial compositions of the upper and lower airways (i.e.,
more evident regional continuity) and greater diversity than
dogs with CAP.
While traditional culture methods provide evidence of live
and cultivable bacteria in a sample and allow antimicrobial
susceptibility testing, 16S rRNA sequencing provides a more
comprehensive proﬁle of taxa present in a sample, whether
or not they are viable or cultivable. Additionally, these data
highlight that just as lack of growth does not imply a sterile
environment, identiﬁcation of a particular organism with either
approach does not imply that this organism is the causative
agent of disease (37). Lack of growth could also be related to
the presence of fastidious organisms, such as Mycobacterium
that require speciﬁc media or growth conditions using standard
methods as it has been documented in people with pneumonia
(38) Bacterial culture with sensitivity testing guides treatment of
clinical infections and thus will still play a key role in therapy of
bacterial pneumonia. However, culture-independent techniques
may provide greater depth of understanding of the changes
in microbial composition that occur in bacterial pneumonia.
These methods could allow for identiﬁcation of pathogens that
may not be readily cultivable, help discriminate true pathogens
from colonizing bacteria (37) and provide insight into potential
treatment strategies that restore balance toward a microbial
population associated with health.
CONCLUSIONS
In
comparing
standard
culture
and
targeted
sequencing
techniques to identify organisms found in BALF of dogs
with bacterial pneumonia, we demonstrated discrepancies
between these techniques in terms of presence or absence of
predominating taxa and numbers of unique bacteria. Dysbiosis
of the respiratory microbiome is a key feature of canine
pneumonia, with decreased relative abundance of bacterial
community members found in health. Additionally, there
appears to be greater regional continuity between the upper and
lower airways in dogs with SBP. While much more commonly
observed in dogs with CAP than SBP, obliteration of microbial
diversity with evidence of overgrowth of one organism was noted
in one-third of the dogs in this study. This may suggest that
loss of dominant species associated with health could underlie
disease pathology. Clinical application of DNA sequencing may
be employed if culture is negative in dogs with compatible
clinical signs and septic suppurative BALF cytology, or if targeted
antimicrobial therapy against the cultivable bacteria fails to
produce disease resolution. Future studies aimed at restoring
a dysbiotic airway microbiome in canine bacterial pneumonia
are warranted.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All
sequence
data
have
been
deposited
in
the
NCBIA
Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under the BioProject accession
number: PRJNA510415.
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
8
October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 354
Vientós-Plotts et al.
Respiratory Dysbiosis in Canine Bacterial Pneumonia
ETHICS STATEMENT
All studies were performed in accordance with the Guide for
the Use and Care of Laboratory Animals, and were approved
by the University of Missouri Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (MU IACUC protocol # 8240).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AV-P participated in the conception and design of the study,
sample collection, DNA extraction, data interpretation, and coauthored the manuscript. AE participated in the conception
and design of the study, contributed resources, interpreted
sequence data, and co-authored the manuscript. CR participated
in conception and design of the study, sample collection, data
interpretation, and co-authored the manuscript. HR assisted with
DNA extraction, sample collection, and study coordination. All
authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge Matt Haight and Savannah
Smith for their assistance in sample collection and Karen
Cliﬀord for assistance formatting ﬁgures. AE is supported
by K01 (OD019924) from the NIH, Oﬃce of Research
Infrastructure Programs.
