Metagenomic next-generation
sequencing of bronchoalveolar
lavage ﬂuid from children with
severe pneumonia in pediatric
intensive care unit
Caiyan Zhang 1†, Tingyan Liu 1†, Yixue Wang 1†, Weiming Chen 1,
Jing Liu 1, Jinhao Tao 1, Zhengzheng Zhang 1, Xuemei Zhu 1,
Zhenyu Zhang 1, Meixiu Ming 1, Mingbang Wang 2,3*, Guoping Lu 1*
and Gangfeng Yan 1*
1Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children’s Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 2Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Birth Defects, Division of Neonatology, Children’s Hospital of Fudan University, National
Center for Children’s Health, Shanghai, China, 3Microbiome Therapy Center, South China Hospital,
Medical School, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
Background: Severe pneumonia due to lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) is
a signiﬁcant cause of morbidity and mortality in children. Noninfectious respiratory
syndromes resembling LRTIs can complicate the diagnosis and may also make
targeted therapy difﬁcult because of the difﬁculty of identifying LRTI pathogens. In
the present study, a highly sensitive metagenomic next-generation sequencing
(mNGS) approach was used to characterize the microbiome of bronchoalveolar
lavage ﬂuid (BALF) in children with severe lower pneumonia and identify
pathogenic microorganisms that may cause severe pneumonia. The purpose of
this study was to use mNGS to explore the potential microbiomes of children with
severe pneumonia in a PICU.
Methods: We enrolled patients meeting diagnostic criteria for severe pneumonia
admitted at PICU of the Children’s Hospital of Fudan University, China, from
February 2018 to February 2020. In total, 126 BALF samples were collected, and
mNGS was performed at the DNA and/or RNA level. The pathogenic
microorganisms in BALF were identiﬁed and correlated with serological
inﬂammatory indicators, lymphocyte subtypes, and clinical symptoms.
Results: mNGS of BALF identiﬁed potentially pathogenic bacteria in children with
severe pneumonia in the PICU. An increased BALF bacterial diversity index was
positively correlated with serum inﬂammatory indicators and lymphocyte
subtypes. Children with severe pneumonia in the PICU had the potential for
coinfection with viruses including Epstein–Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus, and
Human betaherpesvirus 6B, the abundance of which was positively correlated
with immunodeﬁciency and pneumonia severity, suggesting that the virus may be
reactivated in children in the PICU. There was also the potential for coinfection
with fungal pathogens including Pneumocystis jirovecii and Aspergillus fumigatus
in children with severe pneumonia in the PICU, and an increase in potentially
pathogenic eukaryotic diversity in BALF was positively associated with the
occurrence of death and sepsis.
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
01
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Gaoqian Feng,
Burnet Institute, Australia
REVIEWED BY
Renan Marrichi Mauch,
Lund University, Sweden
Stefano Di Bella,
University of Trieste, Italy
Gaurav Bhargava,
I. K. Gujral Punjab Technical University,
India
*CORRESPONDENCE
Gangfeng Yan
gangfeng_yan@fudan.edu.cn
Guoping Lu
13788904150@163.com
Mingbang Wang
mingbang.wang.bgi@qq.com
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Clinical Microbiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cellular and
Infection Microbiology
RECEIVED 28 October 2022
ACCEPTED 11 January 2023
PUBLISHED 16 March 2023
CITATION
Zhang C, Liu T, Wang Y, Chen W, Liu J,
Tao J, Zhang Z, Zhu X, Zhang Z, Ming M,
Wang M, Lu G and Yan G (2023)
Metagenomic next-generation sequencing
of bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid from
children with severe pneumonia in
pediatric intensive care unit.
Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 13:1082925.
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Zhang, Liu, Wang, Chen, Liu, Tao,
Zhang, Zhu, Zhang, Ming, Wang, Lu and Yan.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 16 March 2023
DOI 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Conclusions: mNGS can be used for clinical microbiological testing of BALF samples
from children in the PICU. Bacterial combined with viral or fungal infections may be
present in the BALF of patients with severe pneumonia in the PICU. Viral or fungal
infections are associated with greater disease severity and death.
KEYWORDS
metagenomic next-generation sequencing, severe pneumonia, bronchoalveolar lavage
ﬂuid, Epstein–Barr virus, Pneumocystis jirovecii
Importance
During the COVID-19 pandemic, metagenomic next-generation
sequencing (mNGS) of children admitted to the pediatric intensive
care unit (PICU) with severe pneumonia has been an effective way to
rapidly identify potentially pathogenic novel microorganisms.
In this retrospective study of bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid samples
from 126 children in the PICU, pathogenic microorganisms
associated with severe pneumonia were identiﬁed by mNGS.
Pathogenic bacteria may be combined with viruses such as
Epstein–Barr virus and Cytomegalovirus, and possibly fungi such as
Pneumocystis jirovecii and Aspergillus fumigatus, in the
bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid of children with severe pneumonia
admitted to the PICU.
Background
The global COVID-19 pandemic is now in its third year. Even
without COVID-19, however, pneumonia causes more deaths each
year than any other type of infectious disease (Hansen et al., 2016).
Accurate detection of pathogens and differentiation from background
commensal organisms is essential to guide optimal antimicrobial
therapy. Bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid (BALF) is considered a
specimen suitable for the detection of pathogens involved in
respiratory tract infections (Friaza et al., 2010; Charlson et al., 2012;
Willner et al., 2013; Seo et al., 2015). Metagenomic next-generation
sequencing (mNGS) can be used to assess the microbial composition
of clinical samples without culture, improving the sensitivity of
pathogen detection and providing guidance for clinical practice (Gu
et al., 2019). mNGS of BALF samples can identify pathogenic agents
and improve treatment precision. Leo et al. (Leo et al., 2017) found
that a protocol based on sequential lysis of human and bacterial cells
or mechanical disruption of all cells could be used to extract DNA
from BALF samples and perform mNGS assays. Fang et al. (Fang
et al., 2018) performed mNGS on blood, BALF, and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid samples from an adult patient with severe pneumonia with
unexplained fever and subsequent encephalitis, and they detected
high loads of human adenovirus B55. The patient was treated with
intravenous ribavirin and cleared the virus after 26 days, and mNGS
testing was performed to diagnose unexpected herpes simplex virus 1
encephalitis during hospitalization, leading to timely treatment (Fang
et al., 2018). Qi et al. (Qi et al., 2019) used mNGS on BALF samples
from hospitalized patients with suspected ventilator-associated
pneumonia. mNGS detected new pathogens in addition to those
obtained by culture methods, while potential pathogens, including
bacterial, fungal, and viral organisms, were detected by mNGS in 89%
(40 of 45) culture-negative samples (Qi et al., 2019). Li et al. (Li et al.,
2020a) performed mNGS on 35 BALF samples from 32 adults with
respiratory failure. They found that the diagnostic sensitivity of
mNGS was 88.89% and speciﬁcity was 74.07% compared with the
culture method, with a concordance rate of 77.78% between the two
methods; additionally, the diagnostic sensitivity of mNGS was 77.78%
and speciﬁcity was 70.00% compared with the smear method and
polymerase chain reaction. The diagnostic sensitivity of the mNGS
ﬁndings led to a change in the treatment strategy in 11 of 32 (34.4%)
patients (Li et al., 2020a).
The results of BALF mNGS testing in patients with severe
respiratory infections have been shown to be similar to those of
transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) and transtracheal aspiration. Liu
et al. (Liu et al., 2019) compared mNGS testing on BALF samples and
TBLB tissue samples from patients with peripheral lung infections.
Whereas the speciﬁcity of mNGS was lower for BALF than for TBLB
tissue, the sensitivity of mNGS was higher for BALF than for TBLB
tissue, and the most common infectious agents of the lung were
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Acinetobacter
baumannii (Liu et al., 2019). Kalantar et al. (Kalantar et al., 2019)
performed mNGS on 52 mini-BALF samples from adults with severe
pneumonia and compared them with mNGS results from tracheal
aspirate samples. They found that although there were signiﬁcant
differences between sample types in patients with non-infectious
acute respiratory disease, there were signiﬁcant similarities in the
composition of samples from patients with bacterial pneumonia,
whose microbial community was characterized as the main
pathogen (Kalantar et al., 2019).
Studies of mNGS on BALF samples from patients with severe
respiratory infections have generally been limited to adults; few
reports have focused on children. Takeuchi et al. (Takeuchi et al.,
2019) performed mNGS on BALF samples from 10 children with
respiratory failure and detected signiﬁcant bacterial or viral
sequencing reads in 8 of the 10 patients. In addition, candidate
pathogens were detected in three patients in whom no pathogens
were identiﬁed by conventional methods. Moreover, the complete
genome of enterovirus D68 was identiﬁed in two patients, and
phylogenetic analysis showed that both strains belonged to subtype
B3, a common strain that has spread worldwide in recent years
(Takeuchi et al., 2019). These ﬁndings indicate that mNGS can be
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
02
used for comprehensive molecular diagnosis as well as for pathogen
surveillance in BALF in patients with respiratory tract infections. The
aim of this study was to analyze the microbiome characteristics and
explore the potential pathogens of BALF from pediatric patients with
severe respiratory infection.
Methods
Participant enrollment
The participants in this study were children treated in the pediatric
intensive care unit (PICU) of the Children’s Hospital of Fudan
University from February 2018 to February 2020. The inclusion
criterion was a diagnosis of severe pneumonia according to the
diagnostic criteria established by the World Health Organization
(Bradley et al., 2011; Chisti et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2016). The
primary diagnostic criteria were invasive mechanical ventilation, ﬂuidrefractory shock, an urgent need for noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation, and hypoxemia requiring an FiO2 greater than the
inhalation concentration or ﬂow rate feasible within general care. The
secondary criteria were an increased respiratory rate, PaO2/FiO2 ratio
of < 250, multilobar inﬁltration, Pediatric Early Warning Score of > 6,
altered mental status, hypotension, presence of effusion, comorbidities
(e.g. immunosuppression, immunodeﬁciency), and unexplained
metabolic acidosis. The exclusion criteria for this study were an age
of < 28 days or > 18 years; noninfectious factors such as congenital
heart disease, pulmonary edema, asthma, upper airway obstruction, or
pulmonary cystic ﬁbrosis; contraindications to ﬁberoptic
bronchoscopy; severe cardiopulmonary dysfunction; and coagulopathy.
BALF collection
With reference to the recommendations of the European
Respiratory Society (de Blic et al., 2000), sedation and topical
anesthesia were administered, and the patient’s lungs were lavaged
using an age-appropriate pediatric ﬂexible ﬁberoptic bronchoscope.
The more severely diseased region in patients with diffuse lung disease
or the right middle lobe was selected based on radiological ﬁndings or
evidence from bronchoscopy. Warm saline (1 mL/kg body weight,
maximum 20 mL per fraction) was dripped into the selected lung
lobes, and at least 40% of the ﬂuid was recovered by mechanical
suction using a pressure of approximately 50 to 100 mmHg.
Serum inﬂammatory markers
Venous blood (2 mL) was collected and stored at room
temperature with heparin anticoagulation to complete the assay for
serum lipopolysaccharide (LPS), procalcitonin (PCT), C-reactive
protein (CRP), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and other indices. The speciﬁc
processes are detailed in the Supplementary Appendix.
Lymphocyte subsets
Venous blood (2 mL) was collected, and the peripheral blood
lymphocyte subsets were ﬁrst labeled with ﬂuorescently labeled
monoclonal antibodies. B cells (CD19+), total T cells (CD3+), CD8+
T cells (CD3+CD8+), CD4+ T cells (CD3+CD4+), and natural killer
cells (CD16+CD56+). Cells were stained in 6-color TBNK Reagent
(BD Multitest) that included CD3-FITC, CD16/CD56-PE, CD45PerCP-Cy5.5, CD4-PE-Cy7, CD19-APC, and CD8-APC-Cy7. Flow
cytometry (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) was then performed
to complete the lymphocyte subpopulation analysis.
Clinical microbiology testing
Microbiological culture
BALF was inoculated in blood agar, chocolate agar, and
MacConkey agar plates; placed in a 5% to 10% carbon dioxide
environment; and incubated at 35°C for 24 to 48 hours. Fungal
culture required two temperatures of 28°C and 35°C with a 5- to 7day incubation period, during which bacterial or fungal growth on the
plate was observed daily. Initial determination of speciﬁc
microorganisms was performed based on the different colony
morphologies and staining on the medium.
Mass spectrometry
Suspicious colonies on the medium were selected for further
identiﬁcation of bacterial or fungal taxa by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry.
Drug sensitivity testing
For suspected growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae, suspicious
colonies on the blood agar plate were selected for further puriﬁcation.
The optochin test was performed for identiﬁcation and drug
sensitivity testing of microorganisms such as Escherichia coli strains
ATCC25922, ATCC35218, ATCC25923, ATCC27853, ATCC29213,
ATCC29212, ATCC49619, ATCC66027, and ATCC49766. The drug
sensitivity test was performed at Shanghai Clinical Laboratory Centre.
Detection of common respiratory viruses
Common respiratory viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus,
adenoviruses, inﬂuenza A and B, parainﬂuenza virus, and human
metapneumovirus were detected using an immunoﬂuorescence test
kit (Diagnostic Hybrids, Athens, OH, USA). The procedure is detailed
in the Supplementary Appendix.
mNGS
We performed metagenomic sequencing with reference to our
previously published studies (Wang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2019), as
described in the Supplementary Appendix.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
03
Metagenomics analysis
Microbial ecological diversity
The sequencing data from each sample were ﬁrst normalized to
obtain the number of sequenced reads of individual microorganisms
out of 1 million total sequenced reads [i.e., reads per million (rpm)].
The microbial ecological diversity index of the sample was then
calculated based on the rpm value of each microorganism in the
sample, including the abundance (i.e. the sum of rpm of all
microorganisms), number of species, and alpha diversity index
(Chao1 diversity index and Shannon diversity index). The Chao1
diversity index and Shannon diversity index were calculated using the
vegan package of R software (version 3.6.1).
Determination of pathogenic microorganisms
We referred to a previously published article (Yan et al., 2021) for
the determination of pathogenic microorganisms in BALF, as
described in the Supplementary Appendix.
Correlation/regression analysis
Pearson correlation coefﬁcients and Spearman correlation
coefﬁcients for each microbial ecological diversity index and clinical
phenotype were ﬁrst calculated by the cor.test() function of R software
(version 3.6.5). Next, the lm() function of R software (version 3.6.5)
was used to perform a linear ﬁt of the microbial ecological diversity
index to the clinical phenotypes, was then the ggplot2 package of R
software was used to draw the scatterplot. Statistically signiﬁcant pvalues were obtained by the Wilcoxon rank sum test function
(wilcox.test) of R software.
Results
Clinical information
This study involved 126 children in the PICU, including 84 with
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and 42 with hospital-acquired
pneumonia (HAP). Their mean maximum body temperature was 39°C
± 0.95°C, mean heart rate was 160 ± 19 beats per minute, mean total
duration of hospitalization was 37 ± 29 days, and mean number of days
in the PICU was 30 ± 29 days. The 30-day mortality analysis revealed
24 deaths and 16 cases of abandoned treatment, accounting for 29.4%
of all patients. In total, 86.5% (109/126) of patients had combined
respiratory failure, 24.6% (31/126) had combined severe pneumonia,
24.6% (31/126) had combined sepsis, 5.5% (7/126) had septic shock,
one had encephalitis, and four were being hospitalized after cord blood
stem cell transplantation.
The mean serum CRP concentration was 67 ± 56 mg/L, PCT
concentration was 8.9 ± 19 ng/mL, LPS concentration was 1.0 ± 7.6
pg/mL, and IL-6 concentration was 390 ± 850 pg/mL. The white
blood cell (WBC) count was 18 ± 12 × 109 cells/L, CD3+ lymphocyte
count was 1.2 ± 1.3 × 109 cells/L, CD4+ T cell count was 6.8 ± 8.7 ×
108 cells/L, CD8+ T cell count was 5.0 ± 5.9 × 108 cells/L, and NK cell
count was 1.4 ± 1.8 × 108 cells/L. Pathogenic microorganisms were
detected in 81 patients based on conventional clinical microbiological
testing methods such as blood and other cultures.
Use of mNGS of BALF samples to identify
pathogenic microorganisms associated with
clinical symptoms
mNGS was performed on 126 samples [at the DNA level in most
(101/126, 80.1%) and at the RNA level in a smaller number (25/126,
19.8%)]. Each sample sequenced yielded 2.6 ± 1.4 × 107 clean
sequences. The potentially pathogenic microorganisms in the samples
were further identiﬁed by considering both the relative abundance of
the microorganisms in the samples to be tested and the outlier levels (zscore) in all samples, following the method used in our previous study
(Yan et al., 2021). The relative abundance and z-score distribution of
the pathogenic microorganisms obtained are shown in Figure 1.
Nucleic acid sequences of 88 pathogenic bacteria were detected,
including 9 species of Streptococcus (Streptococcus agalactiae,
Streptococcus australis, Streptococcus milleri, Streptococcus mitis,
Streptococcus oralis, Streptococcus parasanguinis, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae, and Streptococcus
salivarius), 7 species of Staphylococcus (Staphylococcus aureus,
Staphylococcus capitis, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus
haemolyticus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus saprophyticus,
and Staphylococcus warneri), and 3 species of Acinetobacter
(Acinetobacter baumannii, Acinetobacter johnsonii, and
Acinetobacter nosocomialis). The top 25 bacteria are listed in
Figure 2. In total, 13 viral nucleic acid sequences were detected,
including 4 human herpesviruses [Human alphaherpesvirus 1,
Human betaherpesvirus 5 (also known as human cytomegalovirus),
Human betaherpesvirus 6B, and Human gammaherpesvirus 4 (also
known as Epstein–Barr virus)], Human mastadenovirus B, and
Human polyomavirus 4. All viruses are shown in Supplementary
Figure 1. Nucleic acid sequences were detected for 39 pathogenic
fungi, including 4 Aspergillus species (Aspergillus ﬁscheri, Aspergillus
fumigatus, Aspergillus mulundensis, and Aspergillus nidulans) and
Pneumocystis jirovecii; the other fungi are shown in Supplementary
Figure 2. Nucleic acid sequences were detected for 27 protozoans,
including 10 protozoa of the genus Plasmodium (Plasmodium
falciparum, Plasmodium gaboni, Plasmodium gallinaceum,
Plasmodium gonderi, Plasmodium knowlesi, Plasmodium malariae,
Plasmodium reichenowi, Plasmodium relictum, Plasmodium sp, and
Plasmodium yoelii) and 2 protozoa of the genus Trypanosoma
(Trypanosoma cruzi and Trypanosoma theileri). The others are
speciﬁed in Supplementary Figure 3.
Correlation of pathogenic microbial
abundance in BALF with serum
inﬂammatory indicators
We found that the serum LPS concentration was correlated with
the pathogenic bacterial abundance in BALF. Notably, most of the 12
serum LPS-associated bacteria identiﬁed were positively correlated
with the serum LPS concentration, including Acinetobacter
baumannii, Neisseria meningitidis, Neisseria subﬂava, Pseudomonas
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
04
aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Mycoplasma salivarium,
and several others; the full results are shown in Figure 3A. We also
found that the serum CRP concentration was correlated with the
pathogenic bacterial abundance in BALF, with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Corynebacterium striatum positively correlated with
the serum CRP concentration, as shown in Figure 3B. Moreover, the
serum PCT concentration was correlated with the abundance of
pathogenic bacteria in BALF; the abundance of Staphylococcus
aureus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus saprophyticus,
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Mycoplasma
salivarium was positively correlated with the serum PCT
concentrations, as shown in Figure 3C. Likewise, we found that
serum IL-6 concentration was correlated with the abundance of
pathogenic bacteria in BALF, with positive correlations noted for
Acinetobacter baumannii and Acinetobacter nosocomialis. Notably,
we found that certain Streptococcus spp. Pathogenic bacteria in BALF,
such as Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae,
Streptococcus oralis, and Streptococcus mitis, were negatively
correlated with the serum IL-6 concentration, as shown in Figure 3D.
Correlation of pathogenic microbial
abundance in BALF with total WBC count
and T-lymphocyte count
The data showed that the total WBC count was negatively correlated
with the abundance of pathogenic bacteria in BALF, such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Prevotella jejuni, Streptococcus australis,
Achromobacter xylosoxidans, Sphingopyxis fribergensis, Actinomyces
pacaensis, Actinomyces naeslundii, Herbaspirillum huttiense, and others
(Supplementary Figure 4A). We also found that the total WBC count was
negatively correlated with the abundance of Human betaherpesvirus 6B
and Human gammaherpesvirus 4 in BALF (Supplementary Figure 4B)
and with the abundance of fungi in BALF such as Pneumocystis jirovecii
and Aspergillus terreus (Supplementary Figure 4C).
Total T cell count was correlated with the abundance of pathogenic
bacteria in BALF such as Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus
haemolyticus, and Staphylococcus warneri (Supplementary Figure 5A).
Notably, we found that the abundance of Staphylococcus aureus,
Staphylococcus haemolyticus, and Staphylococcus warneri in BALF was
negatively correlated with the counts of blood CD4+ T cell, CD8+ T cell,
and NK cell (Supplementary Figures 5B–D).
Differences in microbiological composition
of BALF between patients with CAP and HAP
We performed a differential analysis of the pathogenic microbial
composition of BALF in patients with CAP and HAP and found 3
pathogenic bacteria that were present at signiﬁcantly different levels.
There were signiﬁcantly greater amounts of Acinetobacter baumannii
and Streptococcus miti in patients with HAP than that in patients with
CAP, while the amount of Schaalia_odontolytica was signiﬁcantly
lower in the patients with HAP than that in the patients with CAP.
B
C
D
A
FIGURE 1
Distribution of microbial abundance and z-score detected by mNGS of BALF samples. (A) Bacteria; (B) Viruses; (C) Fungi; (D) Protozoa. An rpm value of
<0.01 abundance defaults to a log10 (rpm) of −2 for that microorganism in that sample, and a z-score pf >6 defaults to 6 for all samples. The red dots
represent potential pathogens in our selected samples.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
05
We also found a signiﬁcantly higher amount of the potentially
pathogenic fungus Diplodia corticola and the potentially pathogenic
parasite Plasmopara halstedii in the BALF of patients with HAP than
of patients with CAP (Figure 4).
Correlation of mortality and oxygenation
index of severe pneumonia with pathogenic
microbial composition of BALF
We assessed the correlation between lethal phenotypes (death or
abandonment of treatment) and the ecological diversity of pathogenic
microorganisms in BALF. The results showed that the fungal and
protozoa richness (Chao1 index) was signiﬁcantly higher in BALF from
deceased than non-deceased patients (Figure 5A); the fungal and protozoal
diversity (Shannon index) was also signiﬁcantly higher in BALF from
deceased than non-deceased patients (Figures 5B, C). We also assessed the
correlation between lethal phenotypes (death or abandonment of
treatment) and the pathogenic microbial composition of the BALF. The
results showed that Escherichia coli abundance was signiﬁcantly higher in
the BALF from deceased than non-deceased patients. Notably, we found
signiﬁcantly higher abundance of Klebsiella pneumoniae and
Corynebacterium segmentosum in the BALF of patients in the
FIGURE 2
Heat map of potentially pathogenic bacteria detected by mNGS of
BALF samples. For the top 25 bacteria, each horizontal row represents
a sample, and each vertical column represents potentially pathogenic
bacteria. The plus and minus signs in the graph represent signiﬁcant
positive and negative correlations, respectively. The clinical phenotype
is at the top, and the color block on the right represents the value of
the speciﬁc clinical phenotype.
B
C
D
A
FIGURE 3
Correlations of potentially pathogenic bacteria in BALF with serum inﬂammatory indicators. The volcano plot displays the correlations of the potentially
pathogenic bacteria in BALF with the serum (A) LPS, (B) CRP, (C) PCT, and (D) IL-6 concentrations. The horizontal coordinate represents the Spearman
correlation coefﬁcient, and the vertical coordinate represents the negative logarithm of the p-value of the correlation between the clinical phenotype
and potential pathogen; i.e., −log10 (p value). Each point in the graph represents a potentially pathogenic microorganism, and those screened for
signiﬁcant differences have been marked in red.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
06
abandoned treatment group than in the deceased/non-deceased group
(Figure 5D). Additionally, there was a signiﬁcantly higher abundance of
Pneumocystis jirovecii in the BALF of deceased patients than in both the
non-deceased and abandoned treatment groups (Figure 5E).
OI reﬂects the severity of disease in patients with severe
pneumonia. The data showed that OI was associated with increased
abundance of pathogenic bacteria in BALF, including Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae, and Staphylococcus
aureus (Figure 6A). Moreover, The OI was positively correlated with
an increased abundance of the fungi Aspergillus fumigatus and
Rhizopus microspores in BALF (Figure 6B) and with an increased
abundance of the viruses Human mastadenovirus B and Torque teno
virus 29 in BALF (Figure 6C). In addition, there was a weak positive
correlation between OI and the overall viral abundance (Figure 6D).
Sepsis and immunodeﬁciency in patients
with severe pneumonia associated with
BALF microorganisms
Among patients with severe pneumonia, the BALF fungal and
parasite species richness (Chao1 index), Shannon diversity, and
number of species were signiﬁcantly higher in patients with than
without sepsis (Supplementary Figure 6). Additionally, the total
number of bacterial species in BALF was signiﬁcantly higher in
patients with than without immunodeﬁciency (Supplementary
Figure 7A). Moreover, the abundance of Elizabethkingia anophelis
in BALF was signiﬁcantly higher in patients with than without
immunodeﬁciency (Supplementary Figure 7B). Notably, we found
that the abundance of Human betaherpesvirus 5 (i.e., human
cytomegalovirus) in BALF was signiﬁcantly higher in patients with
than without immunodeﬁciency (Supplementary Figure 7C).
Discussion
In this retrospective study, we included 126 BALF samples from
children with severe pneumonia admitted to the PICU with the aim of
exploring the potential microbiome composition. As for mNGS-based
pathogen identiﬁcation and aiding clinical decision-making, this is a
challenging task. In this study, although all BALF samples were
completed with mNGS testing, the turnaround time for performing
mNGS testing from early 2018 to early 2020 was several days or even a
week, with most samples being taken at 48-72 hours. Also,
considering that the condition of PICU patients is rapidly changing;
So we did not wait for mNGS results to start clinical decision-making.
Instead, we refer to the results of conventional clinical immunological
and microbiological testing methods such as lymphocyte subtypes,
inﬂammatory factor markers, and pathogenic microbial cultures for
initial determination of pathogenic infection and clinical decisionmaking. Happily, it is now possible to obtain mNGS results in less
than 24 hours and to guide clinical decision making based on mNGS
in our hospital.
This aim of the present study is to resolve the microbiome
composition of BALF from children with severe pneumonia in
PICU by mNGS technique and to identify some microbiome
features associated with clinical indicators. The mNGS performed
on BALF samples facilitates the rapid identiﬁcation of pathogens of
critical illnesses. However, as with traditional interpretation of
metagenomic data, the interpretation of mNGS results is
challenging. To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the
microbiome composition of BALF, we performed a comprehensive
assessment of microbial composition in BALF according to four
pathogenic microbial communities: bacterial, viral, fungal, and
protozoan, with reference to traditional metagenomic data analysis
methods. By correlating microbial ecological diversity indicators, high
B
C
A
FIGURE 4
Signiﬁcant differences in pathogenic microbial composition of bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid in the CAP and HAP groups. Signiﬁcant differences were
noted in potentially pathogenic (A) bacteria, (B) fungi, and (C) protozoans between patients with CAP versus HAP. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
07
abundance of pathogenic microorganisms with conventional clinical
indicators such as lymphocyte subtypes, inﬂammatory markers, etc.,
some indicative microecological indicators or pathogenic
microorganisms associated with disease were identiﬁed.
Correlation of abundance of
potentially pathogenic bacteria in BALF
with serum inﬂammatory markers and
lymphocyte subtypes
In the present study, we found that the BALF bacterial diversity
indices, including the Chao1 diversity index and overall abundance,
were positively correlated with the serum LPS concentration; the
bacterial species count was positively correlated with the serum PCT
concentration; and that the Pseudomonas aeruginosa abundance in
BALF was positively correlated with the serum LPS, CRP, and PCT
concentrations and negatively correlated with the whole blood WBC
count and CD4+ T cell count.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a conditionally pathogenic bacterium
widely present in nature, human skin, intestine, and respiratory tract;
studies have shown that P. aeruginosa is an important causative agent of
hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) and ventilator-associated
pneumonia (VAP) (Pang et al., 2019); notably, P. aeruginosa is prone
to cause intranasal and ventilator-associated pneumonia in
immunocompromised and hospitalized patients (Killough et al.,
2022). Consistent with this, we found that P. aeruginosa abundance in
BALF was negatively correlated with whole blood WBC counts and
CD4+ T cell counts; also, in this study, we found that the number of
bacterial species detected in BALF was elevated in the immunodeﬁcient
group relative to the non-immunodeﬁcient group (Supplementary
Figure 7A). In short, this implies that the rise in the abundance of P.
aeruginosa may be associated with immunocompromised or impaired
immunity in patients. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most common
B
C
D
A
E
FIGURE 5
Ecological diversity and composition of pathogenic microorganisms in BALF associated with mortality. (A) Mortality associated with Chao1; (B) Mortality
associated with Shannon index; (C) Mortality associated with species count; (D) Mortality associated bacteria; (E) Mortality associated with fungi. ab,
abandoned; de, deceased; non-de, non deceased. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
08
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacterium and a common cause of
ventilator-associated pneumonia in patients in ICUs. Ventilatorassociated pneumonia caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection is
characterized by high morbidity and mortality (Zhuo et al., 2008;
Valencia and Torres, 2009). Experimental models suggest that
ventilator-induced lung injury is associated with increased bronchial
vascular permeability in BALF, higher cell counts and protein
concentrations, and increased inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells into
lung tissue (Wolters et al., 2009). Cytokines are small proteins that
communicate through intercellular signaling and can be considered
immunomodulators of immune and inﬂammatory responses (Spelman
et al., 2006). Human studies have shown that cytokine/chemokine
release and leukocyte recruitment contribute to ventilator-associated
lung injury (Halbertsma et al., 2005) and that IL-6, an inﬂammatory
marker of ventilator-associated lung injury, may contribute to alveolar
barrier dysfunction in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome
(Wolters et al., 2009). IL-6 is an important pro-inﬂammatory cytokine
that is released during infection or tissue injury; IL-6 is mainly expressed
by natural immune cells such as monocyte macrophages, but can also be
produced by Th2 cells, vascular endothelial cells, and ﬁbroblasts (Kang
and Kishimoto, 2021). In the present study, we observed a correlation
between serum IL-6 levels and the abundance of speciﬁc pathogenic
microorganisms in BALF (Figure 3D). Tsay et al. found that, like
mechanical ventilation, intranasal perfusion with P. aeruginosa also
induced IL-6 expression in the lungs (Tsay et al., 2016). We did not ﬁnd
a correlation between P. aeruginosa abundance and serum IL-6 levels in
BALF and could not identify the source of serum IL-6.
Acinetobacter baumannii, a Gram-negative aerobic bacterium, is
listed by the World Health Organization as posing the greatest threat to
human health and as being in urgent need of new antibiotics (World
health organization, 2017; Lee et al., 2017). In recent years, isolates of
Acinetobacter baumannii have been recovered from a variety of extrahospital sources (e.g., vegetables, water treatment plants, and ﬁsh and
shrimp farms) in addition to known natural habitats (soil and moist
environments), and the wide range of sources of this bacterium might
explain the occurrence of community-acquired infections (Eveillard
et al., 2013). Acinetobacter baumannii is a serious pathogen involved in
hospital-acquired and community-acquired infections (Dijkshoorn
et al., 2007). Cases of CAP caused by Acinetobacter baumannii are
rare in Europe and the United States (Serota et al., 2018); instead, most
cases of CAP caused by Acinetobacter baumannii occur in countries
with tropical or subtropical climates. Acinetobacter baumannii is an
emerging pathogen in the Asia-Paciﬁc region, with a high prevalence in
Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Korea, and Australia (Kim et al., 2018).
In the present study, we found that the abundance of Acinetobacter
baumannii in BALF of children in the PICU was positively correlated
with the serum IL-6 and LPS concentrations. Notably, the abundance of
Acinetobacter baumannii in BALF was signiﬁcantly higher in patients
with HAP than CAP; this may be related to the fact that Acinetobacter
baumannii is more common in hospitals than in the community. The
primary target of Acinetobacter baumannii is patients in ICUs, and the
use of antibiotics has led to outbreaks and epidemics of infections
caused by multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii in hospitals
(Dijkshoorn et al., 2007; Ramirez et al., 2020).
B
C
D
A
FIGURE 6
Correlation of oxygenation index with pathogenic microorganisms in BALF of patients with severe pneumonia. (A) The OI was positively correlated with
the abundance of pathogenic bacteria in BALF; (B) The OI was positively correlated with the abundance of pathogenic fungi in BALF; (C) The OI was
positively correlated with the abundance of viruses in BALF; (D) The OI was correlated with the overall abundance of viruses (viral abundance) in BALF.
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
09
Correlation of potentially pathogenic viral
infections in BALF of children in PICU with
immunodeﬁciency and pneumonia severity
Respiratory viral infections are an important cause of pneumonia in
children. Viral bronchiolitis is the most common cause of respiratory
failure in young children requiring invasive ventilation, and coinfections
such as bacterial and fungal infections may prolong and complicate
hospital stays in the PICU (Wiegers et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020b). We
performed mNGS on BALF from children in the PICU and found that
viral nucleic acid sequences were present; in addition, the Chao1 diversity
index of viruses was positively correlated with the maximum body
temperature on admission and negatively correlated with the CD3+
lymphocyte count. As a microbial ecology index, the viral Shannon
diversity index reﬂects both the number of viruses and their abundance.
In calculating the Shannon diversity index of BALF samples, the included
viruses contain both eukaryotic viruses and prokaryotic viruses such as
phages, and usually the number of phage species is more abundant than
eukaryotic viruses. We observed that the Shannon diversity index of
viruses was negatively correlated with the counts of tatol T cell, CD4+ T
cell, CD8+ T cell and NK cell, suggesting whether certain viruses may
have a protective role, such as phages. Considering that phages usually act
as commensal microorganisms and not as pathogenic microorganisms;
therefore, they have not been analyzed and discussed here.
The number of ICU admissions for viral infections is rising. The
Herpesviridae family, including Human gammaherpesvirus 4 (i.e.,
Epstein–Barr virus) and Cytomegalovirus, can be reactivated in ICU
patients, and such viral activation is associated with morbidity and
mortality (Cantan et al., 2019). Consistent with this, we found that the
abundance of Human betaherpesvirus 6B and Human
gammaherpesvirus 4 was negatively correlated with the total WBC
count. Additionally, the abundance of Human betaherpesvirus 5 (i.e.,
human cytomegalovirus) in the BALF of patients with severe
pneumonia was signiﬁcantly higher in those with than without
immunodeﬁciency, suggesting a possible correlation between
immune system dysregulation and viral activation. We also found
that the severity of pneumonia (i.e., the OI) was positively correlated
with the overall viral abundance in the BALF; notably, we found that
the OI was positively correlated with an increase in the abundance of
the viruses Human mastadenovirus B and Torque teno virus 29 in
BALF. In summary, these ﬁndings suggest a correlation between the
viral load in BALF and the severity of pneumonia.
Detection of potentially pathogenic
eukaryotes in BALF of children with severe
pneumonia in the PICU and their association
with death and sepsis
Fungi are another important cause of respiratory infections
(Schmidt et al., 2018). We found signiﬁcantly higher species
richness (Chao1 index), Shannon diversity, and number of species
of pathogenic fungi in the BALF of patients with than without sepsis
in the present study. Aspergillus, Pneumocystis, and Cryptococcus are
the key fungal pathogens known to cause respiratory infections
(Hayes and Denning, 2013). Pneumocystis jirovecii causes
pneumocystis pneumonia, a life-threatening disease in the ICU with
a high mortality rate, particularly in immunocompromised patients
(Salzer et al., 2018; Schmidt et al., 2018). Schmidt et al. (Schmidt et al.,
2018) found that the overall hospital mortality rate was 25.4% and
increased to 58.0% if ICU admission was required. In line with this,
we found a signiﬁcantly higher abundance of Pneumocystis jirovecii in
the BALF of deceased patients than in both non-deceased patients
and patients for whom treatment was abandoned.
Patients in the ICU are more likely to have a history of coinfection
with bacteria and fungi than are patients in the general ward
(Schauwvlieghe et al., 2018). Beumer et al. (Beumer et al., 2019)
found that the incidence of coinfection with bacteria and fungi in the
lungs of patients with inﬂuenza was 55.6% among ICU inpatients,
which was signiﬁcantly higher than in patients in the normal ward
(20.1%), and Aspergillus fumigatus and Pneumocystis jirovecii were
the predominant coinfecting fungi (Beumer et al., 2019). In line with
this, we found that an increase in the abundance of the fungal
pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus in BALF was positively correlated
with the severity (i.e., the OI) of patients with severe pneumonia,
while an increase in the abundance of the bacterial pathogens
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae, and Staphylococcus
aureus in BALF of children in the PICU was also positively correlated
with the severity (i.e., the OI) of patients with severe pneumonia.
Protozoan coinfection increases the risk of pneumonia in children
(D'Acremont et al., 2014; Edwards et al., 2015). We found signiﬁcantly
higher protozoan species richness (Chao1 index), Shannon diversity,
and number of species in the BALF of patients with than without sepsis
in the present study; we also detected nucleic acid sequences of
Plasmodium and Trypanosoma in the BALF of children in the PICU.
Notably, protozoa have a large genome, and the mNGS results only
cover a very small part of their genome. Although in-depth validation is
needed, our results suggest the possibility of protozoan coinfection.
This study aimed to gain a comprehensive understanding of the
microbiome composition in the BALF of children with severe
pneumonia in the PICU. Although uncommon, protozoa such as
parasites may also represent the “potential” pathogenic microbial
composition in BALF (Van den Steen et al., 2010; Deroost et al., 2013;
Wihokhoen et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2022). Therefore, after
metagenomic sequencing, the sequenced reads were aligned to
bacterial, viral, and fungal databases, as well as to protozoan
databases, and the “potential” protozoan composition was obtained.
Considering that the protozoan genome size is larger than that of
bacteria, viruses, and fungi, it is difﬁcult to determine whether
protozoa actually exist with a limited number of reads, but we just
try to understand that the nucleic acid sequence of the parasite was
detected. In the next step, we need to verify the existence of protozoa
by 18S rRNA sequencing technology.
Considering that speciﬁc pathogenic microorganisms were detected
only in a small number of BALF samples; therefore, we did not perform
a correlation/regression analysis of the abundance of speciﬁc
pathogenic microorganisms and clinical indicators, or a multiple
linear regression analysis. Instead, we performed a logistic linear
regression of the microecological diversity indicators with the clinical
indicators, and the results are shown in Figure 6D, where it can be seen
that OI was positively correlated with the abundance of pathogenic
bacteria in BALF. Indeed, the correlation is weaker, but reﬂects a trend.
All patients included in this study were from pediatric intensive
care units; usually, DNA viruses, bacteria, fungi, and mycoplasma are
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
10
the predominant pathogenic microorganisms associated with the
respiratory tract in children, with RNA viruses accounting for a
relatively small proportion. The mNGS used in this study cannot
take into account both DNA and RNA viruses. According to the
clinical empirical judgment of two specialized physicians, 25 of 126
patients were inclined to RNA virus infection, in order to obtain the
test results in the shortest time and save clinical costs. We only tested
the above 25 cases at the RNA level and 121 cases at the DNA level,
and the test results were also consistent with the empirical judgment
results. Of course, the mNGS technique in this study cannot take into
account both DNA and RNA viruses, and there may be missed
detection. Nowadays, our team has developed the mNGS pathogen
capture technique based on mNGS, and the development of this
technique will make up for this deﬁciency and provide a new direction
of choice for pathogenic diagnosis in line with clinical thinking.
This study had some limitations. The inﬂammatory marker testing
using BALF samples can provide direct insight into the impact of different
pathogenic infections on pneumonia outcomes. However, since the
volume of BALF obtained from children is limited; therefore, BALF
samples were not used for inﬂammatory marker assays in addition to
pathogenic assays; as an alternative strategy, we performed inﬂammatory
marker assays on blood samples. The pathogenic nucleic acid sequences
we identiﬁed in BALF in the PICU require in-depth validation, including
completion by clinical microbiological methods such as BALF culture and
antibody testing. Further, multicenter scale-up validation is also needed
for an in-depth assessment of mNGS results relevance to clinical
symptoms in children with severe pneumonia in the PICU.
Conclusions
mNGS of BALF from children with severe pneumonia in the PICU
revealed potentially pathogenic bacterial infections. The increased
bacterial Chao1 diversity index and overall abundance in the BALF
were positively correlated with serum inﬂammatory indicators, and
altered abundance of potentially pathogenic bacteria was correlated
with serum inﬂammatory indicators and altered lymphocyte subtypes.
In addition, there was the potential for coinfection with viruses in these
children as shown by the correlation of the abundance of potentially
pathogenic viruses in BALF with the presence of immunodeﬁciency
and the severity of pneumonia. We also found the potential for fungal
coinfections in these children as indicated by the positive association of
increased diversity of potentially pathogenic fungi in BALF with the
occurrence of death and sepsis.
Data availability statement
The raw data that support the ﬁndings of this study have been
deposited into CNGB Sequence Archive (CNSA) of China National
GeneBank DataBase (CNGBdb) with accession number CNP0004045.
Ethics statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed and
approved by The Research Ethics Board of the Children’s Hospital of
Fudan University (IRB protocol number: 2019-312). Written
informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the
participants’ legal guardian/next of kin. Written informed consent
was obtained from the individual(s), and minor(s)’ legal guardian/
next of kin, for the publication of any potentially identiﬁable images
or data included in this article.
Author contributions
CZ drafted the initial version of manuscript; TL performed
investigation, formal analysis, and visualization; YW, WC, JL, and
JT were responsible for resources and data curation; ZZZ, XZ and
ZYZ validated the data; MM and MW performed Writing - Review &
Editing; MW performed visualization and software; GY and GL
conceived and supervised the study; All authors read and approved
the ﬁnal draft for publication.
Funding
The study was supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2021YFC2701800, 2021YFC2701805),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Program No. 82071733),
Shenzhen Science Technology and Innovation Commission (No.
JCYJ20220530154601004), Shanghai Talent Development funding (No.
2020115) and the Scientiﬁc Research Project of Shanghai Municipal
Health Commission (No. 202140442).
Acknowledgments
We thank Angela Morben, DVM, ELS, from Liwen Bianji (Edanz)
(www.liwenbianji.cn), for editing the English text of a draft of
this manuscript.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated organizations,
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product
that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925/
full#supplementary-material
Zhang et al.
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1082925
Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
frontiersin.org
11
