CASE REPORT
published: 01 March 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00097
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
1
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 97
Edited by:
Fernando Rodriguez de Fonseca,
University of Málaga, Spain
Reviewed by:
Gregg Stanwood,
Florida State University, United States
Anna Brancato,
University of Palermo, Italy
*Correspondence:
Maija L. Castrén
maija.castren@helsinki.ﬁ
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychopharmacology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 27 November 2018
Accepted: 11 February 2019
Published: 01 March 2019
Citation:
Järvinen A, Laine MK, Tikkanen R and
Castrén ML (2019) Beneﬁcial Effects
of GLP-1 Agonist in a Male With
Compulsive Food-Related Behavior
Associated With Autism.
Front. Psychiatry 10:97.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00097
Beneﬁcial Effects of GLP-1 Agonist
in a Male With Compulsive
Food-Related Behavior Associated
With Autism
Anna Järvinen 1, Merja K. Laine 2, Roope Tikkanen 3 and Maija L. Castrén 1,4*
1 Autism Foundation, Helsinki, Finland, 2 Vantaa Health Center, Vantaa, Finland, 3 Department of Psychiatry, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4 Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) frequently display intensely repetitive,
restricted thoughts, and behaviors. These behaviors have similarities to compulsions
and/or obsessions in obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and are primarily treated
with behaviourally-based interventions and serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Due to
the lack of treatment responses in many cases, however, new treatments are being
sought. Here we report beneﬁcial effects of treatment with liraglutide, a glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) analog, on severe obsessive food craving, binge eating, weight gain,
and behavioral problems in an adolescent male with infantile autism and moderate
intellectual impairment. Liraglutide treatment reduced weight and unwanted behavior
seemingly by preventing food-related repetitive thoughts and compulsions. Our report
provides clinical evidence that GLP-1 signaling pathway may represent a novel target for
treating food-related behavioral problems and aggressive behavior in ASD.
Keywords: obsessive-compulsive disorder, autism, glucagon-like peptide-1 agonist, intellectual disability, weight,
overeating
INTRODUCTION
Restricted and repetitive thoughts and behaviors (RRBs) appearing inappropriate to the situation
and odd in context represent some of the core diagnostic features in autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) and associate with diﬃculties in interpreting everyday social signals and limited language
and cognitive capabilities in ASD individuals (1). These are analogous to compulsions, which are
driven by repetitive urge to perform the behavior and the tendency to repeat repetitive actions
in a stereotyped or habitual manner (2). Voluntary control of compulsions is limited and the
ability to delay or inhibit behaviors is diminished. Compulsions can signiﬁcantly disturb the daily
life and provoke far-reaching behavioral and functional problems. Obsessive compulsive disorder
(OCD) is characterized by compulsions and/or obsessions that cause functional impairment (3).
Rewarding eﬀects followed by reduced anxiety caused by obsession link compulsion in OCD to
behavioral addiction.
Diﬀerentiating RRBs of ASD from the obsessions and compulsions in OCD is challenging
because of the heterogeneity of symptom manifestation and remarkable comorbidity characterizing
both disorders. Particularly high-functioning persons with ASD have an elevated risk for OCD and
co-occuring substance abuse (4). The high comorbidity and shared familial risks suggest that ASD
and OCD-spectrum disorders have partially overlapping etiological mechanisms (5). Both ASD and
Järvinen et al.
GLP-1 Targeting in Food-Related Compulsive Behavior
OCD involve behavioral symptoms combined with cognitive
manifestations (obsessions in OCD and insistence on sameness
and preoccupations in ASD), which are presumed to be
underpinned by anxiety, compromised executive functioning,
and sensory phenomena. However, unlike in OCD, these
behaviors often appear pleasurable and self-soothing in ASD,
and the individuals may even behave aggressively if they are
obstructed while performing the activities (5).
Cognitive behavioral therapy and serotonin uptake inhibitors
(SRIs) are the ﬁrst-line treatment for OCD (6). In the
realm of pharmacological treatments for OCD symptoms
in ASD, selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have
been reported to be beneﬁcial (7). However, there is some
evidence that individuals with ASD appear to be particularly
sensitive to behavioral activation side eﬀects of SSRIs (6).
Antipsychotics provide therapeutic beneﬁt for a subgroup
of ASD individuals (8) but antipsychotic drugs also are
disadvantaged by many side eﬀects, including increased appetite,
weight gain, and a subsequent increase in body mass index.
Since treatment resistance OCD symptoms are common, several
other treatment strategies have been tested. Abnormalities
identiﬁed in glutamatergic neurotransmission in OCD have
led to clinical trials with “glutamate-modulating” drugs (9).
In this line of studies anti-convulsive drugs (topiramate
and
lamotrigine),
D-cycloserine,
memantine,
minocycline,
modaﬁnil, N-acetylcysteine, and riluzole have been associated
with beneﬁcial therapeutic eﬀects in OCD but their clinical
utility has not been proven in relatively few studies with partially
inconsistent results.
Food-related obsessions and compulsive overeating represent
some of the landmark characteristics of Prader Willi syndrome
(PWS).
Preliminary
evidence
indicates
that
glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists could be used to treat
defects of satiety responses in this genetically based intellectual
disability syndrome (10–12). Similarly to PWS, both children
and adults with ASD suﬀer more frequently from obesity than
the general population. Here we report beneﬁcial eﬀects of
liraglutide, a human GLP-1 analog, on food-related obsessions
and compulsive eating in a case with a neurodevelopmental
disorder characterized by autistic features. No adverse side eﬀects
of liraglutide were observed in our study/patient case.
CASE REPORT
A 20-year-old Finnish male patient is the second-born child
of healthy, non-consanguineous parents with an unremarkable
family history. His close relatives had no manifestations of
thyroid or heritable endocrine diseases. The perinatal period
was uneventful, however, deﬁcits in eye contact behavior
were noted from early infancy onwards. By the preschool
age, he demonstrated behavioral diﬃculties resembling those
associated with autism, including perseveration and impairments
in social interactive behavior including avoidance of strangers.
Abnormal responses to auditory, olfactory, and oral sensory
stimuli were noted. Motor and phonic tics as well as obsessions
appeared in adolescence being periodically severe. At the
age of 6;9 years, the patient received the diagnoses of
pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise speciﬁed and
mild intellectual impairment, with these later, at the age of 11;2
years, having been modiﬁed to infantile autism and moderate
intellectual impairment. Behavioral problems included aggressive
behavior, which resulted in treatment with risperidone being
initiated at the age of 12 years. Initially the antipsychotic
slightly appeared to reduce behavioral diﬃculties while at the
same time resulting in rapid weight gain and nightmares.
Within 6 months, risperidone was substituted with aripiprazole.
Aripiprazole caused initially fatigue, muscular spasms of jaw,
and slurring of speech at the dose of 5 mg/day. After a break
for several months, aripiprazole treatment was continued and
the dose was slowly increased to 7.5 mg/day. Agitation and
disturbing daily RRBs such as switching on and oﬀa water tap,
checking, and jumping led to the combining of citalopram to the
medication at the age of 14;10 years. Nevertheless, the gradually
increased dose of citalopram to 20 mg/day did not improve
the situation and especially food-related obsessions and constant
weight gain appeared problematic. Craving of food, particularly
sweet drinks, led the patient to e.g., steal food. A temporary
increase in alanine transferase (ALT; 77 U/L, reference range <40
U/L) together with a slight decrease in thyroxin (T4) levels (11
pmol/L, reference range 12–20 pmol/L) were observed. In the
laboratory tests prior to commencing the liraglutide treatment,
ALT was diminished (56 U/L), γ-glutamyltransferase (γ-GT)
normal (<50 U/L), serum TSH 1.3 mU/L (reference range 0.2–
4.2 mU/L) with the values for lipid metabolism, blood count,
creatinine, and fasting glucose being within the normal range.
In metabolic screening, urine amino acids, oligosaccharides, and
glycosaminoglycans were within the normal range, similarly EEG
was normal. Further, karyotyping and fragile X studies resulted
in normal ﬁndings. Ophthalmological examination revealed
hyperopia (+5.0/+5.0) that was treated with glasses. Hearing was
normal in the otoacoustic emissions test.
Within
the
cognitive
domain,
the
patient’s
cognitive
functioning was commensurate with the level of moderate
intellectual impairment (full scale intelligence quotient 43) at
the age of 19;3 years. His verbal comprehension, perceptual
reasoning, and processing speed indices were at the very poor
level (50, 50, and 64, respectively), with the working memory
index being slightly better (71). In terms of memory, rote
learning and digit span were within the normal range with
all other functions being notably compromised. His level of
autistic symptoms as assessed across lifespan were signiﬁcantly
elevated
(Social
Communication
Questionnaire
life-time
version score 24). Similarly, his level of social functioning
was moderately impaired (Social Responsiveness Scale T-score
69, with most pronounced deﬁcits seen in social cognition
and autistic mannerisms). In the Strengths and Diﬃculties
Questionnaire as responded by parents, hyperactivity and
friendship scales resulted in aberrant scores. There were also
signiﬁcant OCD symptoms as assessed by the OCI-R (29 points).
In terms of adaptive functioning, results from the Vineland-II
Adaptive Behavior Scales at the age of 19;3 years indicated
a low level of functioning overall, with the following mental
age equivalents for subdomains: receptive communication
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
2
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 97
Järvinen et al.
GLP-1 Targeting in Food-Related Compulsive Behavior
6;6, expressive communication 12;3, written communication
15;3, personal daily living skills 10;6, domestic daily living
skills 9;6, community daily living skills 13;00, interpersonal
relationships 3;10, play and leisure time 4;7, coping skills 7;1.
In addition, both internalizing and externalizing maladaptive
behaviors were at a clinically signiﬁcant level. In childhood, the
patient’s rehabilitation has included both speech therapy and
occupational therapy.
Treatment with liraglutide was initiated with a dose of 0.6
mg/day and being gradually increased to 2.4 mg/day during the
following 8 weeks. Immediate positive response was observed
in the patient’s food-related behavior manifesting as drastically
subsided obsessive food-related thoughts, craving for food, and
compulsive eating. After ﬁrst week of treatment, a clear reduction
in patient’s body weight was seen (Figure 1). Also obsessions,
compulsions and behavioral problems not related to food,
including aggressive behavior, decreased in a signiﬁcant way at
home. The treatment was continued 36-weeks with the dose
2.4 mg/day. At the time-point 8 weeks, the weight was already
reduced by 6%. From week 25 to the end of the follow-up the
weight reduction settled at 12–13%. In the laboratory control at
8 weeks, the standardized oral glucose tolerance test was normal
(glucose 5.3 and 4.6 mmol/L before and 120-min after the glucose
administration, respectively). In later control fasting glucose and
insulin levels were normal. No adverse side eﬀects of liraglutide
were observed in our patient case.
DISCUSSION
Relevance of the ability of GPL-1 to promote satiety and reduce
food intake in connection with compulsive eating behavior has
recently attracted attention [see review of GLP-1 (13)]. GLP-1
belongs to the group of gut-derived peptide hormones referred
to as incretins, which are released in response to oral intake
of nutrients. Native GLP-1 is rapidly degraded in circulation,
and therefore, long-acting GLP-1 receptor agonists have been
developed, allowing once daily to once weekly administration as
subcutaneous injection. GLP-1 agonists have been shown to be
eﬀective in the pharmacotherapy of obesity and type 2 diabetes
(14). In the current study, we found that liraglutide remedied
food-related obsessions and related disruptive behavior in our
patient case with ASD. The patient’s obsessions to food initially
emerged following the treatment with atypical antipsychotics.
Antipsychotic drugs aﬀect several neurotransmitter systems
implicated in both motivational and regulatory aspects of food
intake, insulin release, and glucose metabolism. It has also
been postulated that centrally-mediated vagal eﬀerent activity,
regulated via hypothalamus through repetitive and increased
food ingestion as well as via increased circulating free fatty acids
contribute to the eﬀects of atypical antipsychotics (15). The
rapid weight gain caused by antipsychotics did not associate with
alterations of serum lipids in our patient case, albeit marginal
increases in alanine amino transferase as well as reduced serum
thyroxine concentration during risperidone treatment suggested
some metabolic changes. However, the values had normalized
before the treatment with GLP-1 analog, which was used in
combination with aripiprazole and citalopram. There was no
evidence that liraglutide had an interaction with the patient’s
other medication.
According to the parental reports, the patient case also
demonstrated food-independent RRBs which ﬂuctuated in
severity but appeared daily and very disturbing prior to the onset
of the liraglutide treatment. Notably, liraglutide ameliorated
FIGURE 1 | The effects of liraglutide at the dosage from 0.6 to 2.4 mg on the body weight and the body mass index of the patient.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
3
March 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 97
Järvinen et al.
GLP-1 Targeting in Food-Related Compulsive Behavior
these behaviors as well as antisocial and challenging behavior
that was initially the focus of the treatment with antipsychotics,
suggesting beneﬁcial eﬀects of liraglutide treatment also on
impulse control. The substantial decrease in weight during
liraglutide treatment likely has several underlying causal
mechanisms paralleling results of addiction research describing
compulsive substance use and reward seeking behavior (16).
GLP-1 receptor activation decreases anticipatory food reward
and increases consummatory food reward, which may reduce
cravings for food and prevent overeating, respectively (17). Direct
cognitive-behavioral eﬀects of GLP-1 analog by altering the
reward circuits of the brain have been shown in several addictions
with inherent compulsive substance usage (16). There is evidence
that GLP-1 signaling in hippocampus enhances learning and
memory, as well as plays a role in protecting brain from seizures
and neuronal damage via safeguarding against amyloid-beta
peptide induced cognitive decline (18). It is thus possible that in
our patient case the administration of liraglutide also inﬂuenced
some cognitive processes and altered reward circuits of the
brain in addition to the physiological satiety-promoting eﬀects.
However, the direct eﬀects of liraglutide on cognition were not
measured in our study.
Both ASD and OCD are characterized by poor behavioral
inhibition and executive functioning, which are associated with
dysfunction in cortico-striatal-thalamic circuits (19). GLP-1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of hindbrain neurons, which send
axons to many forebrain regions, including the paraventricular
nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. Eﬀects of GLP-1 on feeding
behavior are mediated via GLP-1 receptors (GLP-1R) in PVN
neurons (20). However, GLP-1R ablation in PVN does not
aﬀect glucose metabolism and the vagus nerve is implicated in
the eﬀects of peripherally administered GLP-1 on food intake
and glycaemia (21). GLP-1Rs are expressed in vagal aﬀerent
neurons which terminate in the lamina propria of the intestinal
mucosa and vagal aﬀerents may transfer the gut GLP-1–derived
signals to the brain and mediate satiating and glucoregulatory
responses. Altogether, neuronal mechanisms that contribute to
the beneﬁcial eﬀects of GLP-1 analog on the behavioral challenges
in ASD remain to be further studied.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The present study points to GLP-1 signaling as a potential target
for treating food-related behavioral problems in intellectual
disability syndromes with ASD. As our ﬁndings are limited
to a single patient case further studies are warranted to
further explore the therapeutic utility of GLP-1 analog in
neuropsychiatric symptoms in a sizeable population and
randomized controlled trials.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and a written consent was obtained from both the
patient and his caretaker authorizing the publication of the
clinical case report. The anonymity of the patient case has
been preserved.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MC designed the study and together with AJ managed the
literature searches and analyses. MC wrote the ﬁrst draft of the
manuscript. All authors contributed to and have approved the
ﬁnal manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the parents of the patient case for active and
enthusiastic participation in the study. We are very grateful to
Medical Director Tero Saukkonen for his critical reading of
the manuscript.
