STUDY PROTOCOL
published: 16 May 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.822976
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Edited by:
Pedro Morgado,
University of Minho, Portugal
Reviewed by:
Brian P. Brennan,
Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School,
United States
Zezhi Li,
Guangzhou Medical University, China
*Correspondence:
Zhen Wang
wangzhen@smhc.org.cn
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Anxiety and Stress Disorders,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 26 November 2021
Accepted: 04 April 2022
Published: 16 May 2022
Citation:
Wang P, Gu W, Gao J, Wang C,
Fang J, Hu M, Xiang H, Li B, Liu N,
Tang W, Wang X, Jia Y, Li Y, Cheng Y,
Tang Z, Simpson HB, Stein DJ and
Wang Z (2022) Protocol for a
Pragmatic Trial of Pharmacotherapy
Options Following Unsatisfactory Initial
Treatment in OCD (PROCEED).
Front. Psychiatry 13:822976.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.822976
Protocol for a Pragmatic Trial of
Pharmacotherapy Options Following
Unsatisfactory Initial Treatment in
OCD (PROCEED)
Pei Wang 1, Wenjie Gu 1, Jian Gao 1, Changhong Wang 2, Jianqun Fang 3, Maorong Hu 4,
Hui Xiang 5, Bin Li 6, Na Liu 7, Wenxin Tang 8, Xijin Wang 9, Yanbin Jia 10, Yi Li 11,
Yuqi Cheng 12, Zhen Tang 13, Helen Blair Simpson 14, Dan J. Stein 15 and Zhen Wang 1,16*
1 Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 2 Department of
Psychiatry, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, Henan, China, 3 Mental Health Center, General
Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Ningxia, China, 4 Psychiatry Department, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Jiangxi, China, 5 Guizhou Provincial People’s Hospital, Guizhou, China, 6 Mental Health Center, West China
Hospital, The Sichuan University, Sichuan, China, 7 Department of Medical Psychology, The Afﬁliated Brain Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China, 8 Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Mental Health Center Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Zhejiang, China, 9 The First Psychiatric Hospital of Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 10 Department of
Psychiatry, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China, 11 Wuhan Mental Health Center, Hubei, China,
12 First Afﬁliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China, 13 Suzhou Guangji Hospital, Jiangsu, China,
14 Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, United States,
15 Department of Psychiatry and South African Medical Research Council Unit on Risk & Resilience in Mental Disorders,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 16 Institute of Psychological and Behavioral Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China
Background:
Selective
serotonin
reuptake
inhibitors
(SSRIs)
are
the
ﬁrst-line
pharmacotherapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), but a large proportion
of patients do not achieve remission after an adequate SSRI trial. To the best
of our knowledge, there have been no well-powered randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) of sequenced pharmacotherapy using pragmatic research designs. China
provides a unique context for undertaking such a trial that will recruit the largest
treatment-naïve participants and systematically compare the efﬁcacy of different
sequenced pharmacotherapy.
Methods: A pragmatic research design will be adopted, with n = 1,600 treatmentnaïve OCD patients initially treated for sertraline for 12 weeks, and with non-remitters
then randomized to 5 different augmentation or switching pharmacotherapy options for
another 12 weeks. The 5 arms will include: (1) treatment with higher than usual doses
of sertraline, (2) switch to ﬂuvoxamine, (3) switch to venlafaxine, (4) augmentation with
memantine, and (5) augmentation with aripiprazole.
Discussion:
China is uniquely positioned to recruit sufﬁciently large sample sizes
of treatment-naïve OCD patients to compare different pharmacotherapy options; data
from the proposed trial promises to help inform current clinical practice guidelines by
providing important information about optimal pharmacotherapy choice for those who
demonstrate no response or response but no remission to ﬁrst line pharmacotherapy.
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Trial Registration:
The trail was registered on 27 August 2020 in ClinicalTrials.gov
(https://register.clinicaltrials.gov/) (NCT04539951).
Keywords: obsessive-compulsive disorder, treatment-naïve, pharmacotherapy, alternatives, remission
INTRODUCTION
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a common and
disabling disorder that has a 12-month and lifetime prevalence
of 1–3% worldwide, and that is accompanied by signiﬁcant
morbidity, impairment and huge economic burden (1–4). OCD
is characterized by obsessions and compulsions; obsessions
are comprised of unwanted, intrusive and persistent thoughts
and images, while compulsions are comprised of repetitive
behaviors, often executed with the purpose of relieving anxiety
and distress caused by obsessions (5). There is a strong evidencebase demonstrating the eﬃcacy and tolerability of selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in OCD, and these agents
are therefore viewed as a ﬁrst-line pharmacotherapy in OCD
treatment guidelines (6–9).
Nevertheless, a large proportion of OCD patients are response
only partially or not at all to an adequate trial of an SSRI
(10–12). The literature on randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
of pharmacotherapy approaches to OCD when response to an
SSRI is unsatisfactory is relatively sparse, with little attention
to pragmatic or “real-world” research designs, or to those who
respond but do not remit to treatment. Pragmatic trials are
important for obtaining data on representative samples (13),
while remission entails improvements in both symptoms and
function and so is an important goal for patients (14–16).
On the basis of the existing sparse literature, several
pharmacotherapy options for OCD patients who do not respond,
or who respond but do not remit, have been outlined in current
treatment guidelines. These include (1) treatment with higher
than usual doses of an SSRI, (2) switch to a diﬀerent SSRI, (3)
switch to a diﬀerent class of medication, (4) augmentation with
a dopamine blocker, and (5) augmentation with a glutamatergic
agent. There is a need for additional data, particularly real-world
data, on how best to choose between these options.
China
provides
a
unique
context
for
undertaking
appropriately
powered
RCTs
to
compare
diﬀerent
pharmacotherapy options for those who do not remit following
an adequate SSRI initial trial. Our research will be able to recruit
the largest treatment-naïve sample in a clinical trial to date,
and such data may be extremely useful for informing evidencebased treatment guidelines on optimal pharmacotherapy of
treatment-naïve OCD. The proposed RCT will adopt a pragmatic
treatment design, recruiting OCD patients for a 12-week trial
of sertraline, and then randomizing non-remitters to 5 diﬀerent
treatment options.
METHODS
Design
This study is a multi-center clinical study with a total of 13 clinical
centers that specialize in the management of patients with OCD.
In the Chinese context, such centers evaluate and manage many
treatment-naïve patients. This allows such centers to undertake
well-powered pragmatic research trials.
A randomized block design will be used in this study and
all eligible participants accepted into this study will undergo an
initial course of pharmacotherapy (phase I), and non-remitters
will be randomly allocated to ﬁve treatment arms (phase II). In
phase II, the 5 arms will comprise (1) treatment with higher
than usual doses of sertraline, (2) switch to ﬂuvoxamine, (3)
switch to venlafaxine, (4) augmentation with memantine, and (5)
augmentation with aripiprazole. Physician and patients will know
which treatment arm is employed, but change in OCD symptoms
will be assessed at several diﬀerent time points by independent
evaluators (IEs) who will be blind to treatment assignment. The
ﬂow diagram of the study protocol is shown in Figure 1.
Inclusion/ Exclusion Criteria
Participants will be recruited from Shanghai Mental Health
Center and twelve other specialized OCD sites in China.
Individuals will be included in the study if they (1) meet
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, ﬁfth
Edition (DSM-5) criteria for OCD as the primary diagnosis (17);
(2) are in the age range from 18 to 65 years; (3) have a score of
at least 20 on Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS)
(18); (4) have never received medication for OCD, and have not
received any form of psychotherapy for OCD in the past 6 month;
(5) have provided written informed consent.
Participants will be excluded if they (1) have met the DSM5 diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorders, or the Bipolar and Related Disorders;
(2) have a moderate or higher risk of suicide (?9 on the
Suicide Module in the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric
Interview (MINI) (19); (3) have substance use that is suﬃciently
severe to possibly impact negatively on treatment adherence
in the past 1 year; (4) have severe depression with Beck
Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) score of ≥29 (20); (5) have
comorbid psychiatric or medical disorders that may impact
negatively on adherence to or on the eﬃcacy of medication (e.g.,
borderline personality disorder, CNS disorders); (6)are pregnant
or lactating females.
Screening and Baseline Visit
All recruited patients will be diagnosed as having OCD as
the primary diagnosis by a psychiatrist, using DSM-5 criteria.
The Y-BOCS (18) will be used to assess the severity of
OC symptoms, and the MINI (19) will be used to screen
history of comorbid DSM-5 psychiatric disorders. At baseline,
demographic data (including age, gender and education) will
be collected, and participants will undergo a brief physical
examination including blood routine and liver function tests.
In addition, participants will complete the self-administered
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
FIGURE 1 | Flow chart of this study. Y-BOCS, Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale; CGI, clinical global impression.
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory Revised (OCI-R) (21), BDI-II,
Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) (22) and Sheehan Disability Scale
(SDS) (23) to measure the severity of clinical symptoms. The
Chinese versions of all measures have been proved to be reliable
and eligible (24–27).
Interventions
Experimental Phase I: Initial Treatment
The protocol will be approved by the Institutional Review Board
of all participating centers. All recruited participants will provide
written informed consent before any study procedures are
undertaken. Participants will be made fully aware of the design
of the study, and of possible adverse eﬀects of the medications
under investigation.
Sertraline was chosen to represent the SSRIs as the initial
treatment. The rationale for this chosen is as following: First,
sertraline is one of four SSRIs approved by the National Medical
Products Administration (NMPA) for the treatment of OCD in
China, and is recommended as ﬁrst-line agent by the Chinese
Practice Guideline on OCD (9). Second, in terms of drug
metabolism, sertraline demonstrates linear pharmacokinetics
when daily dose is between 50 and 200 mg (28), so it is
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
straightforward for physicians to adjust the dose according to the
patient’s condition. Third, there is good evidence of the safety
and tolerability of sertraline, and this medication has few drug
interactions. In addition, sertraline is considered the medication
treatment of choice for OCD in the clinical practice in China.
In phase I, participants will receive sertraline, initially at 50
mg/d, with a weekly 50 mg/d further increase, to the maximum
recommended dosage (200 mg/d) or to the maximum tolerated
dosage (<200 mg/d). Patients will be on their maximum dose by
week 4, so allowing an assessment of response at 12 weeks (29).
• If the patients achieved remission in the ﬁrst-step treatment
[scores of ≤12 on the Y-BOCS and Clinical Global Impression
–Severity (CGI-S) rating of 1 or 2 at week 12], participants will
be continued on sertraline for another 12 weeks (30).
• Participants who do not achieve remission in the ﬁrst-step
treatment (scores of >12 on the Y-BOCS or CGI-S ≥3) will
be randomly assigned to the second-step treatment. However,
participants who do not achieve remission because they cannot
tolerate a high dose of sertraline (200 mg) will not enter the
second phase.
Experimental Phase II: Sequenced Treatment
Alternatives
The
second-step
therapy
will
consist
of
ﬁve
treatment
options
including
higher-than-usual-maximal
dosage
of
sertraline, switching to ﬂuvoxamine, switching to venlafaxine,
augmentation
with
memantine,
and
augmentation
with
aripiprazole.
The
rationale
for
each
of
these
treatment
options follows.
• Higher-than-usual-maximal dosage of sertraline: Previous
evidence from a meta-analysis of OCD pharmacotherapy
suggested that higher doses of SSRI may allow a more optimal
response with similar adverse eﬀects, when compared with
lower doses of SSRI (31). Furthermore, a multicenter doubleblind randomized controlled trial revealed that a higher-thanusual dose of sertraline (250–400 mg/d) was more eﬃcacious
than a standard dose (200 mg/d), but with similar tolerability
(32). In view of this literature, but also considering the
precautionary principle, we set an intermediate dose (300
mg/d) as the upper limit.
• Switching to ﬂuvoxamine: Research suggests that diﬀerent
SSRIs may have equal eﬃcacy in OCD, but treatment
guidelines note that diﬀerent SSRIs may have slightly diﬀerent
pharmacological proﬁles and suggest that some patients
who do not responds to a particular SSRI may respond
to a diﬀerent one (33). There is good evidence for the
eﬃcacy of ﬂuvoxamine in OCD. In addition, ﬂuvoxamine is
considered the second medication treatment choice for OCD
in China (34).
• Switching
to
venlafaxine:
Although
venlafaxine
is
not
considered a ﬁrst-line agent for OCD, this serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) has a diﬀerent
pharmacological mechanism from the SSRIs, and so is
recommended for patients who do not remit after treatment
with an SSRI in a number of practice guidelines (6, 8). A
randomized double-blind study also showed that venlafaxine
(300 mg/d) was equally eﬀective to paroxetine (60 mg/d) in
treating patients with OCD (35). A real-world research also
suggested that venlafaxine may be useful in a proportion of
patients with poor response to SSRIs (36). In addition, the
maximum dose of venlafaxine approved for clinical practice
in China is 300 mg/d. So, we set the target dose at 300 mg/d
although the recommendation for venlafaxine is 350 mg/d in
some countries.
• Augmentation with memantine or aripiprazole: Augment
treatment strategies have widely been recommended and
studied in patients who have not had an adequate response
to SSRIs. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and openlabel data have both demonstrated that SSRI augmentation
with memantine, a glutamatergic agent, is superior to placebo
in OCD (37, 38). Similarly, RCTs and open-label data have
demonstrated that SSRI augmentation with aripiprazole, an
atypical antipsychotic, is eﬃcacious in OCD (39). There
is some evidence that aripiprazole has a superior eﬃcacy
and tolerability proﬁle compared to other antipsychotic
agents when used to augment SSRIs in OCD (39). Thus, a
number of practice guidelines suggest that SSRI augmentation
with memantine and aripiprazole may be considered in the
management of OCD (6, 8, 40).
In summary, during phase II, the treatment options will be:
• Remain on sertraline (higher dosage): where sertraline 200 mg
has been tolerated, dosage will be increased by 50 mg
fortnightly to a maximal dose of 300 mg/d or to the maximum
tolerable dose (<300 mg/d).
• Switch to ﬂuvoxamine: ﬂuvoxamine will be initiated at
a dose of 50 mg/d, increasing quickly to a maximal
dose of 300 mg/d or the maximum tolerated dose by
week 4 (41).
• Switch to venlafaxine: venlafaxine will be initiated at 75 mg/d,
increasingly weekly by 75 mg/day, to a maximal dose of 300
mg/d or the maximum tolerated dose (35).
• Augment with memantine: sertraline will be augmented with
memantine initially at 5 mg/d, and increasing by 5 mg/d
weekly to a maximal dose of 20 mg/d (10 mg twice daily) or
the maximum tolerated dose (42).
• Augment with aripiprazole: sertraline will be augmented with
aripiprazole, initially at 5 mg/d, and increasing by 5 mg/d
weekly to a maximal dose of 20 mg/d or the maximum
tolerated dose (43).
At the conclusion of phase II at week 24, physician may
choose to continue the current treatment regime, or to make
appropriate changes, as per the principles of the Chinese Practice
Guideline on OCD (which are similar to those of other practice
guidelines from around the world) (6–9). The extended follow up
assessment will last up to the month 12 after baseline (i.e., week
25-week 52) if participants are willing to stay in the program.
Adjuvant
therapy
with
benzodiazepines
or
nonbenzodiazepines for insomnia will be allowed during the
course of the study, but other psychotropic agents will not be
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
permitted. Participants can withdraw from the study at any time
if they wish to do so, without any consequences.
Sample Size
To determine the detectable eﬀect size, sequential multipleassignment randomized clinical trials (SMART) were used
to verify the design of pharmacotherapy options following
unsatisfactory initial treatment in OCD. Given preliminary data
and literature retrieval, an expected remission rate to Y-BOCS
(phase I) (44). In phase II, there are 5 groups. Through multiple
comparisons, the clinical remission rate of the two groups with
the smallest diﬀerence was evaluated, P_T = 20%, P_C = 10%.
We use the type I error at 0.05 (α = 0.05), type II error at 0.2
(β = 0.2) and get a sample size of 199 in each group [total
sample size is 199∗5/(1–20%) = 1,244] using PASS software
version V11. Consider a 20% drop-out rate, the minimum sample
size of N = 1,600 for Phase I was calculated according to the
possible combination.
Primary Outcome
The primary outcome will be OCD symptoms severity as
measured by the Y-BOCS (18) and by IEs. The Y-BOCS has
been shown to have good psychometric properties, is sensitive for
measuring treatment eﬀects, and is regarded as the gold standard
for symptom severity assessment in trials of OCD.
Secondary Outcome
The secondary outcomes will comprise clinical severity (anxiety,
depression, and obsessive-compulsive symptoms), functional
impairment and side eﬀects at diﬀerent time, as assessed with the
following measures:
Clinical Global Impression
The Clinical Global Impression (CGI; National Institute of
Mental Health) (45) is a clinician-rated scale to assess treatment
response in patients with mental disorders. It requires the
clinician to rate how much the patient’s illness has improved or
worsened relative to a baseline measurement (phase I: week 0;
phase II: week 12).
Beck Anxiety Inventory
The Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) (22) is a 21-item, self-report
inventory which identiﬁes anxiety symptoms and quantiﬁes their
intensity. Respondents are asked to rate how much they have
been bothered by each item over the past week.
Beck Depression Inventory-II
The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) (46) is a 21-item, selfreport rating inventory that measures characteristic attitudes and
symptoms of depression. It includes both cognitive and somatic
symptoms of depression.
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised
The Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory Revised (OCI-R) (21) is a
18-item self-report measure of obsessive-compulsive measures.
It is chosen because of its psychometric properties and the short
time that its administration requires.
Sheehan Disability Scale
Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS) (23) is a reliable, brief self-report
scale that assesses disability or functional impairment on 3 items:
work, social life and family life.
Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale
The Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale (TESS) (47) is widely
used to record side eﬀects. We will use it to assess tolerability of
the diﬀerent treatment arms.
Tolerability
The tolerability of treatment will be deﬁned as side eﬀect
discontinuation in this study. as deﬁned by the proportion
of patients who discontinued treatment due to adverse events
during the study (48).
Medication Management
Screening visit will include Informed consent, demographic data,
MINI Psychiatric Interview, symptom measures. All the recruited
participants of this study are interviewed and evaluated by IEs
who are blind to randomization every two or four weeks after
enrollment and following-up evaluation will be up to week 24.
If participants are willing, we will continue to extend follow up
interview for up to 12 months after baseline (week 25-week 52).
Details are provided below (Table 1).
1. Interview 1 (week 0): veriﬁcation of inclusion/exclusion
criteria, assessment of insight, symptom measures, laboratory
investigation (e.g., electrocardiogram, blood testing, and other
necessary tests).
2. Interviews 2–8 (week 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 24): follow up
with symptoms measures, laboratory investigation, recording
adverse events, ending record.
3. Extended interview (up to 12 months after week 0): follow
up with symptom measures, laboratory inspection, recording
adverse events.
All participants will complete the self-reports mentioned
above and will be administered the clinician-rated scales either
face-to-face or via telephone or by remote video conferencing.
Adherence
To increase adherence to pharmacotherapy, the clinician treating
the patient will emphasize the importance of continuous
administration of medication at each visit. In addition, all
participants will be asked to record their daily medication intake
in standard forms. Drug dosage reduction, increase or missing
administration will be recorded. From all records the participants
will be divided into three categories: good compliance, deﬁned as
medication taken as intended; moderate compliance, deﬁned as
reduced medication to one to two tablets per day for a maximum
of 4 weeks and/or no tablets for a maximum 2 weeks as projected;
and poor compliance, deﬁned as reduced medication to one to
two tablets per day more than 4 weeks and/or no tablets more
than 2 weeks.
Safety and Monitoring
The TESS will be used by the clinician treating the patients to
evaluate side eﬀects at each visit following initiation of treatment.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
TABLE 1 | Timing of assessments and data collection.
Baseline
Treatment and follow-up phase
Extended follow up
Timepoint (Weeks)
0
2
4
8
12
16
20
24
25–52
Informed consent
X
MINI
X
demographic data
X
Primary endpoint
Y-BOCS
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Secondary endpoint
OCI-R
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
BDI-II
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
BAI
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SDS
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
CGI
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
TESS
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Tolerability
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Ending record
X
MINI, the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview; Y-BOCS, Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale; OCI-R, Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory Revised; BDI-II, Beck Depression
Inventory-II; BAI, Beck Anxiety Inventory-; SDS, Sheehan Disability Scale; CGI, Clinical Global Impression; TESS, Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale. X represents must-done item.
Adverse and secondary events will be recorded from the baseline
visit and throughout the follow-up visits. All adverse events will
be report to the administration agency of the hospital. Serious
adverse events will be reported to the Ethics Committee at each
site and to the lead site. The association of an event with study
drugs will be evaluated based on a temporal and biological
correlation analyses.
Data Collection and Management
Participants in this study will be interviewed and evaluated by
IEs in the study, and the data will be directly collected using the
electronic data management system.
• Electronic Case Report Form (eCRF): Data administrators will
build eCRFs according to the research protocol.
• Permission Assignment: Data administrators will create
accounts and grant diﬀerent permissions to access the system
according to diﬀerent identities of researcher, rater and
inspector. For example, researchers of each center will only be
able to browse and modify the data they collect themselves.
The case situation at each center will be read by the supervisor,
who has no authority to modify the data, but who can
comment or raise questions.
• Data input: Clinical researchers or coordinators will promptly
and accurately enter the data into the eCRF.
• Data Questions and Answers: For the questions in the case
report, the independent supervisor will issue the Q&A form,
and the researcher or evaluator should answer and return it as
soon as possible. The data administrator will modify the data
according to the answers of the researcher and may issue the
Q&A form again if necessary.
• Data Locking and Exporting: After each participant completes
the experiment and is veriﬁed by the supervisor, the data
manager will lock the data. During the experiment, real-time
lock data was exported for interim analysis as required. After
all the test data were locked, the data manager will export them
to the designated database for ﬁnal statistical analysis.
Statistical Methods
Descriptive analysis and statistics will be undertaken with SPSS
20.0. All the relevant data of patients meeting the inclusion
criteria will be used as the data set for analysis. Comparison
among the clinical and demographic characteristics of the
samples will conducted by chi-square test and t-test. The patient’s
adherence to treatment and the factors aﬀecting prognosis will be
classiﬁed and counted by SPSS combined with R. Ordinal multicategorical logistic regression model will be used to construct the
index system of symptom severity. Mixed-eﬀect models will be
used to evaluate the eﬃcacy of treatment on both the primary
treatment outcome measure (the YBOCS) as well as on secondary
treatment outcome measures.
Informed Consent
The researcher needs to explain in detail the purpose of
this study, research contents, the potential risk and beneﬁt,
alternative therapies available and the rights and obligations
of the participants in line with the Helsinki Declaration to all
screening participants (compulsive disorder patients willing to
participate in the study). The medical treatment of patients who
do not agree to enter the study will not be impacted. Participants
have the right to withdraw at any stage after they enter the study.
The explanation should also include the necessary matters to
protect the individual rights and interests of the participants.
With full explanation, after conﬁrming that the patient fully
understands the study and clearly knows the informed consent,
the participant can enter the research process only by signing the
informed consent and indicating the date.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 822976
Wang et al.
Pragmatic Trial of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
If the informed consent is revised during the study, the
modiﬁed content of the informed consent shall have an impact
on the patients out of the group after the end of the study, and
patients undergoing treatment or follow-up shall sign the newly
revised informed consent again.
Quality Control
Research coordinator of each research center is responsible for
the coordination in the research, and the implementation of
the project schedule management. The independent supervisor
will monitor the quality of the work by reviewing informed
consents, and completion of eCRFs. They will visit site every
6 months. 25% of all cases are randomly selected for checking
by the independent monitor. In addition, all sites will submit
a brief description of the clinical features of their patients
at time of recruitment to monitor accuracy of diagnosis (for
example, excluding patients with body dysmorphic disorder). In
addition, all IEs will receive online training in administration
of the YBOCS and CGI. The training process will comprise
introductory lectures and demonstrations by experienced raters,
followed by repeated rating of videos until such time as inter-rater
reliability is obtained. To maintain reliability of ratings, raters
will receive additional training up to four times per year and
inter-rater reliability will be assessed.
DISCUSSION
The current clinical trial is being conducted to compare
diﬀerent approaches to the pharmacological treatment of OCD
patients who do not respond, or who respond but do not
remit, to ﬁrst line SSRI pharmacotherapy. To the best of our
knowledge, this will be the ﬁrst study to compare the eﬃcacy
of several switching or augment strategies for medications
in such patients, and the largest prospective randomized
pragmatic trial of OCD to date. Our hope is that this study
will provide useful evidence to inform clinical practice and
international guidelines on the pharmacological management
of OCD.
There are several unique features of this study. First, the
design is pragmatic in several respects, for example, patients with
secondary major depression will be included, and physicians and
patients will not be double-blind to treatment. Second, the design
is rigorous, with randomization to diﬀerent treatment arms,
and with raters being kept blind to treatment randomization in
Phase II. Third, the trial will compare several augmentation and
switching strategies. Finally, this will be the largest RCT of OCD
ever conducted to date.
In conclusion, this pragmatic study is the ﬁrst randomized
trial that compares 5 diﬀerent pharmacotherapy options in
patients who do not have remission after treatment with an
SSRI, and it should provide data that are useful in informing
the optimal pharmacotherapeutic approach to such patients. It
hopes to complement the existing literature on large pragmatic
trials of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression,
by contributing equally informative data on OCD.
TRIAL STATUS
This trial is recruiting and is expected to be complete in
December 2024.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical approval for this trial has been granted by the Institutional
Review Boards of Shanghai Mental Health Center and other
participating institutions 20/04/2020 (2020- 11), and written
informed consent will be obtained from all participants. The trial
is registered as NCT04539951.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Preparation of the original manuscript draft was conducted by
PW and WG, with reviewing and editing by HS, DS, and ZW.
JG, CW, JF, MH, HX, BL, NL, WT, XW, YJ, YL, YC, and ZT are
responsible for study assessments and monitor the participants
at 13 clinical centers. The design of the study was done jointly
by all authors. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
This clinical trial was supported by the key programs of Shanghai
Mental Health Center (CRC2018ZD03) and Shanghai Clinical
Research Center for Mental Health (19MC1911100).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all participants who make contribution to our study.
